copyright 2023 aea berkes, enrico, and ruben gaetani. income segregation and the rise of the knowledge  economy. american economic journal applied economics 15, no. 2 69  102. https doi.org 10.1257 app.20210074.  access to this work was provided by the university of maryland, baltimore county  scholarworks umbc digital repository on the maryland shared open access  platform.  please provide feedback  please support the scholarworks umbc repository by emailing scholarworksgroup umbc.edu and telling us what having access to this work means to you and why  it s important to you. thank you. income segregation and rise of the knowledge economy enrico berkes ruben gaetani  26th february 2018 abstract we analyze the effect of the rise of knowledge based activities on spatial inequality within u.s. cities, exploiting the network of patent citations to instrument for local trends in innovation. we nd that innovation intensity is responsible for 20 of the overall increase in urban segregation between 1990 and 2010. this effect is mainly driven by the clustering of employment and residence of workers in knowledge based occupations.
we develop and estimate a spatial equilibrium model to quantify the contribution of productivity and residential externalities in explaining the observed patterns. endogenous amenities account for two thirds of the overall effect. we illustrate the relevance of the model for policy analysis by studying the impact of four proposed projects for amazon s hq2 on the structure of chicago.
jel classi cation d3, o11, o15, o33, r11  enrico berkes northwestern university, 2211 campus dr, evanston il, 60208, enrico.berkes u.northwestern.edu ruben gaetani university of toronto, 105 st. george street, toronto on , m5s3e6, ruben.gaetani rotman.utoronto.ca. we thank treb allen, matthias doepke, richard florida, ben jones, lorenz kueng, marti mestieri, matthew notowidigdo as well as seminar participants at northwestern university, university of toronto, mcmaster university, ryerson university, 2016 conference of swiss economists abroad , 2017 european meeting of the urban economic association , 2017 north american meeting of the urban economic association , eief, bocconi, crei, insead, and attendees at the 2017 workshop of the kauffman foundation for their helpful comments. this research was funded in part by the ewing marion kauffman foundation. the contents of the paper are solely our responsibility. comments are welcome.1 introduction the knowledge economy is a set of economic activities relying on non manual and nonroutine technical skills, scienti c knowledge, and intellectual creativity. over the past 40 years, these activities have become the main engine of economic prosperity in advanced countries. since 1975, the share of value added generated by knowledge intensive sectors in the united states has increased by almost 15 percentage points, and the number of patents per capita issued by the united states patent and trademark of ce has doubled . the same trend is observed when considering several other measures of knowledge intensity, including educational attainment, number of scienti c publications, ratio of intangibles to assets, and share of workers employed in r d activities and creative sectors. the suggested explanations for this structural shift include globalization, automation of routine jobs, and the steady increase in the burden of knowledge that requires an everincreasing number of r d workers to sustain a constant productivity growth .
this trend is believed to be associated with major social and cultural changes. individuals with different education levels, abilities, and social connections have been differentially exposed to the opportunities offered by this new economic landscape and, as a result, have experienced diverging economic fortunes. moretti argues that the geographical dimension is the most striking aspect of this divergence. the rise of the creative class has allowed and induced waves of gentri cation and re urbanization of metropolitan cores, as well as the development of specialized innovation clusters in suburban areas.
the reorganization of production and consumption activities within cities, driven by supply factors as well as demand factors , appears to be correlated with the emergence of intellectually creative jobs in many fast growing local economies .
one of the most evident signs of this reorganization of the urban structure is the sharp increase in income segregation in u.s. cities. our preferred measure of income segregation, the cross census tracts within commuting zone gini index, increased by 3 gini points over the period 1990 2010, which corresponds to 70 of the increase in overall inequality over the same period of time . however, the extent to which the rise in income segregation in u.s. metropolitan areas re ects a causal effect of the expansion in knowledge intensive activities remains an open question. theoretically, there are several reasons to believe that such effect exists. first, innovation and other creative jobs crucially depend on knowledge transmission, which has been shown to be strongly localized . an increase in the returns to new ideas makes clustering in space with individuals who offer high learning opportunities more convenient for creative 11975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015 year202224262830323436 of value added 0.100.150.200.250.300.350.400.450.50 patents per 1000 peoplefigure 1.1 the blue line is the contribution to u.s. gdp of computer and electronic products, electrical equipment, appliances and components, information, nance and insurance, professional and business services, educational services, health care and social assistance, arts, entertainment and recreation . the dashed red line is the number of patents per 1,000 people issued to u.s. inventors by the uspto.
people. second, workers in the knowledge economy tend to be disproportionately sensitive to urban and social dimension, such as quality of schooling and social relationships, which are often strictly local in nature.
uncovering the fundamental causes of the increase in urban segregation is of great importance, as segregation has been shown to have a rst order impact on several policy relevant outcomes, including schooling , health , and inter generational mobility . however, inferring the direct impact of an expansion in creative jobs is problematic because of potential reverse causation and the presence of unobservable factors affecting, at the same time, the explanatory and dependent variables. examples of these factors include  nancial or housing shocks, that affect, at the same time, the urban environment and the ability of a geographical area to develop innovation based activities.
in this study, we address this challenge by adopting an instrumental variable approach, that exploits exogenous variation in knowledge intensity across u.s. cities. our analysis suggests that innovation intensity is responsible for 20 of the aggregate trend in income segregation. the analysis further reveals that the effect we measure can be explained only in part by diverging income paths of initially segregated neighborhoods. a major part of the effect is, in fact, explained by an increase in the geographical sorting of households along 21990 2000 2010 overall42.8 46.2 47.0gini across cts within czs19.5 20.6 22.5 table 1.1 the overall gini is obtained from the fred website. the data sources and methodology for the across ct and segregation measures are explained in the text.
the income dimension.
to measure the knowledge intensity of the local economy, we use a newly assembled dataset of geo referenced uspto patents in the years 1975 2014. by comparing citation patterns in the early period with the ones in the late period , we document the existence of a stable network of knowledge diffusion across geographical areas and technological classes. this persistence suggests that knowledge links established in the past are broadly orthogonal to changes in the economic environment.
using the network in combination with actual patenting in the period 1995 2004, we build a credible instrument for current innovative activities at the local level. we run an extensive set of validation exercises to address the remaining endogeneity concerns.
our two stage least squares results imply that a one standard deviation increase in patenting between 1990 and 2010 leads to an increase in the measured income segregation of 1.19 gini points, equal to 39 of the overall increase in segregation over the considered period. educational and occupational segregation, which is the extent to which residents of different educational backgrounds and occupations sort themselves in the city, also surges.
the estimated effect is stronger for high learning sectors and even negative for low learning ones, such as textiles. the iv analysis reveals that the bias in the ols estimates is negative. this bias suggests that unobserved shocks affecting, at the same time, segregation and innovation tend to operate on the two variables in opposite directions, overall. financial shocks that generate widespread housing and neighborhood dismantlement are possible examples.
these results can be explained as the outcome of two inherently different phenomena. on the one hand, an increase in inequality in a metropolitan area that is perfectly segregated induces a one to one increase in measured segregation . on the other hand, the measured segregation increases even in the absence of any change in inequality when people move closer to other people with a similar level of income . the analysis strongly supports the sorting effect as the primary cause of the increase in urban segregation resulting from the expansion of innovation activities, with the inequality effect only 3explaining a limited portion of it.
in the second part of the paper, we explore two possible mechanisms. we argue that innovation shocks increase the returns from local learning externalities and generate incentives for rms to cluster in space to bene t from them. as a result, high education, high salary workers move close to these areas to reduce commuting costs, therby affecting residential segregation. we provide evidence that employment in knowledge intensive occupations becomes more geographically concentrated in cities experiencing larger innovation shocks. we also propose that the endogenous response of residential amenities plays an important role in amplifying this effect. consistent with this interpretation, we nd that the impact is signi cantly stronger in cities whose variation in residential amenities is not anchored to persistent or natural amenities. the magnitudes of the estimated effects suggest that localized knowledge spillovers and residential amenities play an important role in linking innovative activities to income segregation.
to quantitatively disentangle the relative importance of these two forces in determining the trends in segregation that we observe in the data, we build a general equilibrium model of the city structure in the spirit of ahlfeldt et al. arsw hereafter that embeds endogenous amenities and productivities. we extend the model in arsw by introducing heterogeneity in workers occupations workers in creative occupations enjoy local learning externalities that are directly affected by a city wide knowledge shock, whereas workers in non creative occupations have stagnant productivity that is unaffected by the surrounding economic activity. both types of workers perceive local residential externalities that are determined by the density and background of their neighbors.
to estimate the strength of local externalities, we rely on the exogenous cross city variation in knowledge intensity inferred in the empirical analysis. to this end, we impose that residual factors affecting the spatial distribution of economic activity do not vary systematically with the predicted patenting growth. in particular, our identifying assumption is that the within city average of the change in the exogenous components of productivity and residential amenities is independent of the value of the knowledge shock. the structural estimation reveals the existence of steep, localized residential externalities for agents in creative sectors. this nding con rms that the endogenous response of residential amenities in neighborhoods where knowledge workers concentrate is disproportionately valued by knowledge workers themselves, and it operates as a powerful ampli cation channel in driving the increase in segregation. this asymmetry accelerates the effect of an initial shock to geographical sorting in the city. the model suggests that about two thirds of the overall impact on urban segregation can be explained through the endogenous response of localized, occupation speci c residential amenities.
4we illustrate the relevance of the model for policy analysis by running four counterfactual exercises that analyze the impact of four chicago based bids for amazon s new headquarters. our simulations suggest that although some high knowledge workers relocate to the high amenity neighborhoods by the lake in all scenarios, the location of the campus has a sizable effect on the local development of the neighborhoods around, as well as on the overall increase in income segregation. the impact on segregation would be the smallest when the campus is located in the southern part of the city, as it would attract high salary workers where low income neighborhoods currently prevail.
related literature this study contributes to the literature on the causes of income segregation in cities in advanced countries in general, and the united states, in particular. jargowsky documents a steady increase in economic segregation in u.s. metropolitan areas since 1970, and confronts this trend with the slow decline in racial segregation. in more recent research, reardon and bischoff document that the trend in residential segregation that started in the 1980s continued, to a lesser extent, until very recently. they also show that residential segregation in cities is correlated with the increase in income inequality. income inequality at the city level has been intensively analyzed by baum snow and pavan , and baumsnow, freeman and pavan , who document a positive relationship between city size and an increase in the dispersion of earnings they interpret this relation as evidence of a skill biased change in agglomeration economies. diamond studies the geographical sorting of college graduates across u.s. cities between 1980 and 2010, whereas the current study focuses on the determinants of income and occupational sorting within cities.
income segregation has been widely studied, particularly in relation to the role that neighborhood effects play in social and economic outcomes, such as education, health, and inter generational mobility. education and segregation have a strong two way link, especially in countries where public spending in schooling is very localized. for example, baum snow and lutz analyze the response of white families in schooling enrolment following the racial desegregation of u.s. metropolitan areas in the 1960s and 1970s. chetty and hendren use tax records in a quasi experimental setting to measure the strength of neighborhood effects on children and their ability to explain differences in inter generational mobility across areas.
this study examines the distributional effects of innovation, but focuses speci cally on the process of knowledge creation. a similar approach is adopted by aghion et al. , who use cross state variation and nd that changes in innovation intensity can explain the 5rise in top income inequality in the united states. florida and mellander conduct a comprehensive study of urban segregation in u.s. metro areas and link this increase to the emergence of the creative class and the expansion of jobs in the high technology industry.
in the present study, we provide causal evidence that supports their interpretation.
on the theory side, we augment the model developed by ahlfeldt et al. by allowing for agents of different backgrounds . while their strategy uses cross neighborhood exogenous variation in the concentration of economic activity given by berlin s division and reuni cation, our structural estimation relies on exogenous cross city variation in the intensity of knowledge spillovers for the innovative sector.
the rest of the paper is organized as follows. section 2 introduces the data and the measures of inequality, segregation, and knowledge intensity. section 3 describes the empirical strategy and results. section 4 introduces the model setting, discusses the structural estimation, and presents the quantitative results. section 5 concludes.
2 data and measurement we combine data on innovation, captured by patenting activity, with social and economic indicators from the census and the american community survey . for the purposes of our empirical analysis, we interpret commuting zones as cities and census tracts  as neighborhoods . czs are de ned with respect to actual commuting ows in the u.s. and, contrary to msas, constitute a complete partition of the country.1given that our objective is to assess how innovation shocks affect residential and employment concentration within a local labor market, czs are the natural unit of geographical aggregation for our analysis.
we now proceed to describe the data sources and main variables in more details.
2.1 patents data our preferred measure of knowledge intensity is patenting within a local labor market. patent data are collected from the united states patents and trademark of ce . the uspto has digitized the full text of all the patents issued from 1976 onwards, and made the les available for download. we download and parse all the les up to march 2015 and construct a new dataset that includes, for each grant, information on ling and issuing year, 1we use the de nition of 2000 commuting zones provided by data.gov.
6technological class,2forward and backward citations as well as residence of its inventors. grants are then assigned to a cz based on the location of their rst inventor.
from the publicly available documents, we identify a total of 5,030,264 patents out of which 2,634,606 are located in the united states.
2.2 segregation, inequality and other economic outcomes our preferred measures of inequality and segregation in cities are based on the gini index which has the advantage of being widely used, and therefore offers a natural reference point for our empirical analysis. mathematically, the gini index is de ned as twice the area between the lorenz curve and the 45 degree line. more precisely, letting figncz i 1be the set of basic units in a cz ordered from the poorest to the richest, the gini index of city czis de ned as  ineq cz 100  1 2 ncz   i 1i   i0 1xi0 xcz   where xiis the income of the basic unit i, whereas xcztotal city income. equivalently, we can construct a measure of income segregation in city cz, de ned as inequality of income across neighborhoods, where each unit in neighborhood ctis assigned the average income of the neighborhood itself. in particular, letting fctgmcz ct 1be the set of neighborhoods in a cz, ordered from the poorest to the richest, we de ne segregation in city czas  segr cz 100  1 2 mcz   ct 1  nct nczct   ct0 1xct0 xcz   where xctis total neighborhood income andnct nczis the population share of neighborhood ct in city cz. in other words, segr czmeasures the variation of income within a cz, once the variation within neighborhoods has been removed.3in the extreme case in which average income of each neighborhood is the same, our measure takes value zero. on the other ex2although each patent is associated to multiple classes, the uspto assigns a single main class to each grant. this main class is available only in the us classi cation system, although in our analysis we use the international patent classi cation. since each grant is associated with several ipc classes but only one main uspto class, we build a many to one function that maps every uspto class to a single ipc class based on the associations that recur more often.
3in the implementation of we use a piecewise linear, instead of a step function, to approximate the lorenz curve. this guarantees that segr czis always between zero and one. the empirical results are robust to using the theil index, that has the advantage of being decomposable into between and within components of income dispersion, but it has the disadvantage that its upper bound is determined by the size of total population. this makes it dif cult to use this index to analyze the evolution of inequality over time.
7treme, when households are perfectly sorted across neighborhoods, segr czis equal to ineq cz.
information on income is provided at the ct level by the national historical geographic information system .4the nhgis assembles data from the census and the american community survey and aggregates them at various geographical levels. data at the ct level divide households into 15 income bins.5to measure inequality and segregation, we need the income distribution . the problem arises from the fact that the top bin is unbounded, with an average that potentially varies substantially across cts. the literature has approached this issue in different ways, each with its own advantages and limitations. appendix a.1 discusses them and provides a detailed description of the procedure we use to approximate the income distribution.6 from the nhgis, we also extract data at the ct level on population, education and rents.
these are used either as controls or in ancillary analyses throughout the text. the structural estimation of the model requires data on the distribution of residence and employment by occupation in each ct, average earnings by occupation at the cz level, and measures of bilateral commuting times and commuting ows across cts. the distribution of residence by occupation is obtained by matching information from the nhgis and the integrated public use microdata series .7the distribution of employment by occupation is gathered from the national establishment time series . the nets provides data on employment, geographical location and industry for the universe of establishments over the period 1990 2015.8contrary to the county business pattern, this dataset has the advantage of also including jobs in the public sector. industry is then mapped into occupations by using the crosswalks provided by the bls. average earnings by occupation in each cz are compiled from the ipums.
bilateral commuting times across cts are taken from the open source routing machine .9this routing engine allows us to compute travel time by car for each pair of coordinates. we collect data on commuting times for each pair of neighborhoods within each 4https www.nhgis.org .
5the lower bounds of each income bracket are 0 , 10,000 , 15,000 , 20,000 , 25,000 , 30,000 , 35,000 , 40,000 , 45,000 , 50,000 , 60,000 , 75,000 , 100,000 , 125,000 , and 150,000 .
6to validate our procedure further, we compute segregation in using income per capita in each ct provided by the nhgis, that does not require to make assumptions on the distribution of the top bin. the correlation between the two variables is 90 in 1990 and 91 in 2010 .
7https www.ipums.org  8in particular, the dataset includes about 10 million observations in 1990 and about 30 million observations in 2010. the vast majority of the establishments can be univocally assigned to a ct. the establishments for which we can only identify the zip code are proportionally distributed to the corresponding cts based on their area. we discard the establishment for which the geographical information is only available at a state level. more details in appendix a.2.
9http project osrm.org  8city for a total of 16.2 million pairs.10finally, bilateral commuting ows are collected at the census block level from the longitudinal employer household dynamics dataset.11. data at a block level are then aggregated to obtain commuting ows at our preferred level of geographical aggregation .
appendix a.2 provides summary statistics and further details on the construction the main variables.
2.3 data timeline in this paper, we study the long run impact of local innovation activities on income segregation and inequality within u.s. cities. for most of the analysis we look at changes in local labor market outcomes over a 20 year period, speci cally, between 1990 and 2010. the structure of the data, schematized in figure 2.1, is especially suitable for this purpose.
socio economic outcomes at the ct level are available every ten years, whereas patent data cover a 40 year period that can be conveniently divided into two 20 year samples. the early sample is used to infer knowledge links across geographical and technological areas in the u.s. and to measure innovation for the 1990 observation. the late sample  is itself divided into two time periods. the rst decade is used in conjuction with the knowledge links previously estimated to calculate the local shocks to innovation used as an instrument. the second decade is used to measure innovation for the 2010 observation. to avoid our results to be driven by transitory shocks to innovation, we compute the patenting activity for each data point as ten year averages .
3 empirical analysis the main question of this paper is whether czs that experience an expansion in innovation and knowledge activities also experience an increase in income segregation, de ned as variation of income across neighborhoods within the city. we rst identify a causal nexus between those phenomena and empirically investigate its features. we then use a quantitative model to infer the relative importance of economic forces behind our ndings as well as some prevailing features of production and consumption in a knowledge economy.
10the osrm can be run locally and has therefore the advantage of not being subject to query limits. however, real time data on traf c are not available, as it is the case for more popular services such as google maps.
the commuting times collected this way are therefore to be interpreted as lower bounds.
11https lehd.ces.census.gov  9figure 2.1 the t 0 observation corresponds to 1985 1994 data for patenting, and the 1990 census for economic and demographic variables. the t 1 observation corresponds to 2005 2014 data for patenting, and the 2008 2012 acs for economic and demographic variables.
the empirical model studies the relationship between income segregation at the city level and the size of local patenting activity  ycz,t at bcz glog dxcz,t ecz,t  where yczis segregation, xcza set of controls for city cz, and t2f1990, 2010g. our instrument for patenting allows us to generate exogenous variation for the late sample , while taking patents in the early sample at their observed level. this requires us to estimate the model in differences  dycz a gdlog ddxcz ecz  and instrument for dlogin the 2sls analysis. since we include the logarithm of population in the set of controls, the results would be identical if patents per capita are used instead. to avoid having to drop observations with zero patents either in 1990 or 2010, we adopt the convention of taking the logarithm of one plus total patents.12for robustness, we also estimate including the set of controls at their 1990 level.
12since all the regressions are weighted by total population in 1990 and zeros are concentrated in scarcely populated areas, this strategy yields virtually identical results as alternative strategies used in the literature . also note that, since we consider 10 year averages for patenting activity, only 25 commuting zones have a patenting activity which is equal to 0 either in 1990 or in 2010. the total population of these is about 208,000 people in 1990 .
10 4 3 2 1 0 1 2 3 4 patenting growth 10 505101520change in segregation r2 0.10 1.27figure 3.1 unconditional correlation between growth in patenting and change in income segregation between 1990 and 2010, weighted by total number of households in 1990.
3.1 correlations and ols figure 3.1 shows the unconditional correlation between the change in income segregation and the growth rate of total patents between 1990 and 2010. the figure is weighted by total number of households in the rst period . the r2of the weighted regression is 0.10 and the coef cient is statistically and economically signi cant. a one standard deviation increase in patenting growth is associated with an increase of 31 of one standard deviation in segregation in the cross section of czs.
in table 3.1, we include a set of control variables that might naturally confound this correlation. first, since the number of cts changes substantially between 1990 and 2010, there might be the risk that a dimensionality bias in the construction of our segregation measures leads us to mismeasure the increase in segregation in cities where the number of cts has grown more. to account for this possibility, in column we control for the growth in the number of cts within the city.13in columns , we include the growth rate of popula13it is possible that controlling for the growth rate in the number of cts is not enough to account for the potential dimensionality bias in the construction of our segregation measures. to address this concern, we run a set of simulations in which we reassign cts to czs under the constraints that each cz is assigned the same number of cts as the original dataset, and each cz has approximately the same population as the original dataset. this random assignment experiment reveals that the pure dimensionality bias is zero for all practical purposes.
11tion and income, respectively. local industry composition at the beginning of the sample could be a major confounding factor if aggregate shocks at the industry level had an impact both on a location s expansion in knowledge intensive activities and on other variables affecting the urban environment. hence, in column we control for trade shocks using the measure of exposure to import from china developed by autor et al.
.14finally, the role of the public sector in providing at the same time local services for residents and nancial support to innovation activities may generate a signi cant bias. in column , we control for the growth rate of local public spending, provided by the census at the county level.15although some of the controls attenuate the size, the coef cient for patent growth remains positive, statistically signi cant and economically large.16 table b.3 reports the results for the ols regressions when the controls are included in levels at their 1990 value, instead of growth rates. results are virtually unchanged. as shown in appendix b.6, we uncover a similar pattern when we consider segregation along an educational or occupational dimension. to measure educational segregation, we use a modi ed version of the gini index, where individuals are assigned 1 unit of income  if they have a college degree and 0 otherwise. as for occupational segregation, we use the classi cation of individuals into creative and non creative occupations, as outlined in appendix a, which consitutes the basis for our structural model in section 4. in this case, residents are assigned 1 unit of income if they are employed in a creative occupation, and 0 otherwise. both measures display a positive and signi cant correlation with patenting growth.
3.2 instrumenting for patenting activity the evidence discussed up to this point must be interpreted with caution. to claim the existence and identify the strength of a causal relationship, we need to identify variation in patenting that is orthogonal to unobserved factors that might affect at the same time the expansion of a knowledge based economy and urban segregation. the range of such possible factors is large and the direction of the bias is ex ante ambiguous. examples of unobserved factors include short run phenomena such as housing shocks and nancial shocks, or long14this measure is constructed at the cz level as dipw uit jlijt lujtdmucjt lit, where litis 1990 employment in cz ianddmucjtis the change in us import from china in industry j, between 1990 and 2007. since the authors use 1990 czs , we construct a crosswalk between the two partitions based on the intersection with the highest population.
15this data is available for download at http www2.census.gov pub outgoing govs special60 .
16data for the last two controls is not available for all the commuting zones in our sample, so that the number of observations is lower than 703. data are mainly missing in low populated areas. we exclude the last two controls in our benchmark speci cation, and in tables where full controls are included but not reported. results change to a negligible extent when these two variables are included.
12dep. variable change in segregation , 1990 2010   patenting growth 1.27 0.84 0.93 0.63 0.62 0.64     ct 2.22 3.21 4.36 4.35 4.29     of household 2.13 3.43 3.39 3.43    income 8.20 8.02 8.21    import exposure 0.01 0.01   local govt spending 0.06   obs. 703 703 703 703 687 579 r20.10 0.14 0.16 0.23 0.23 0.23 table 3.1 all regressions are weighted by total number of households in 1990. controls are in growth rates, 1990 2010. missing observations in columns and re ect data availability at the source and are concentrated in low population regions. robust standard errors in parentheses.
 p 0.01, p 0.05, p 0.1.
run trends such as technological obsolence of local industries, that have a direct impact on the urban context, as well as potentially affecting patenting and other innovative activities.
one might also be worried about inverse causality, with income segregation being the cause, rather than the consequence, of the emergence of the knowledge economy in u.s. local labor markets.
in this section, we propose an instrument for innovation activities at the local level that can be used to tackle this identi cation challenge. the strategy we propose is general and can be applied to other contexts in which channels of knowledge diffusion are observable and measurable. we use the observed network of patent citations to infer the existence of persistent diffusion links across technological classes and geographical areas. observing a patent that cites another invention reveals the existence of an underlying link between the technological classes and the geographical areas of the two grants. the more citations we observe from and to the same class cz pair, the stronger the underlying link. in the reminder of this section, we provide details on the mathematics and intuition behind the instrument. section 3.4 discusses conditions and evidence for its validity.
133.2.1 construction of the instrument the idea behind the instrument is that local patenting is determined, at least partly, by ideas that are generated elsewhere in the economy, and that transmit to local innovative activities through channels of knowledge transmission that are pre determined, stable over time, and inferrable from the network of patent citations. in order to be used to draw conclusions on the causal effect of innovation on segregation and inequality, this instrument must have predictive power on actual patenting in 2005 2014 and identify variation in patenting that is uncorrelated with unobservable factors that can affect at the same time innovation and the dependent variable. we extensively discuss the rst point in the next sub section, where we show that the network of diffusion inferred in the early sample is in fact persistent and can be used to predict innovation in the late sample. as for the second point, our identi cation assumptions can be summarized in two main points   innovation shocks that occur in other geographical areas do not have a direct impact on local outcomes , other than the effect that operates through knowledge diffusion, and there are not unobservable factors that affect at the same time the ability to form knowledge links with speci c areas in the past and local segregation and inequality outcomes 20 years later. section 3.4 discusses the conditions for and the evidence in support of the validity of the instrument.
formally, we proceed in two steps. in the rst step, we use the observed citation patterns to isolate knowledge links across space, time and the technology spectrum. for each patent of class missued in cz rat time t d, we rst calculate the share of citations that it receives from patents produced in other commuting zones at time t. we then sum up over the time period that goes from 1985 to 1994 and, to account for size effects in the citations distribution, we divide by the total number of patents of class missued in cz rat time t d.
mathematically, we calculate a coef cient of diffusion as  d75 94 r,s,m,n,d 8    1994   t 1985  p2sp  1994   t 1985  q1fq2gr6 s 0 r sford2f1, . . . , 10g  where sp is the share of citations that a patent p2 gives to patents of class mproduced in cz rat time t dfor all the s s different from r. to reduce endogeneity concerns, we set the coef cient to zero for links that start and end in the same cz. the coef cient can be interpreted as how much of a 14new patent in , the destination class cz pair, is induced by a previous patent in , theorigin class cz pair, dyears after ling. the idea is that existing patents are perfectly substitutable building blocks for future innovation. note that since we use d2f1, . . . , 10g, we need to use the entire early sample to compute the coef cients of diffusion.
note that this approach implicitly assumes an input output model for the production of ideas. in particular, d75 94 r,s, , ,dis equivalent to an input output matrix speci c to each pair of cities, ,17and time lag, d. each entry, d75 94 r,s,m,n,d, of this matrix determines how many patents of class mproduced in cz rare necessary to produce an extra patent of class nin czsafterdyears. the main departure from a classic input output model of production is that in our case ideas are non rival, non excludable inputs. as a result, the sum of all the inputs that appear in the production of new patents can be larger than the overall amount of available inputs.18 in the second step, the coef cients of diffusion constructed using the 1975 1994 sample are used to predict patenting in each class cz pair for the 2005 2014 period. more precisely, to estimate the patenting activity in the destination cz sin 2005, we apply the adjacency matrix of the network with lag 1 to the actual patenting activity of all the other  czs in 2004 and then add up the results. in a similar way, we then apply the adjacency matrix with lag 2 to the actual patenting activity that occured in 2003, and so on until lag 10. to obtain the predicted patenting activity, we sum the numbers we obtained at all lags.
mathematically,  pats,2005 c200510   d 1  r2s  n2n  d75 94 r,s, ,n,d t patr, ,2005 d where d75 94 r,s, ,n,dis a column of the adjacency matrix that contains the coef cients of diffusion 17note that the network is not symetric in cities, so that d75 94 r,s, , ,d6 d75 94 s,r, , ,d 18to x ideas, consider a world with two czs that only produce two types of patents and that only exists between 1975 and 1978. assume that one patent of class vehicles is led in detroit in 1975 and that san francisco in 1976 produces 100 patents of class computers that only cite the one patent led in detroit the year before. in this case, our measure of knowledge diffusion between the pairs and at lag 1 would be  ddt,sf,vh,cpu ,1 100.
now, further assume that in 1978 detroit les another patent of class vehicles that cites 30 of the patents produced in san francisco 2 years before. in this case, we would have, dsf,dt,cpu ,vh,2 1 30 the intuition is that, from what we observe in the citations network, one single patent of class vehicles in detroit produces enough ideas to generate 100 patents of class computers in san francisco. on the contrary, we need 30 patents of class computers in san francisco to produce a single patent of class vehicles in detroit.
15from cz rto cz sand class n. each row in the vector represents a technological class in the origin cz. the vector patr, ,2005 dcontains the actual number of patents for each class led in cz rin year 2005 d. the term c2005is a rescaling term that makes sure that the total number of patents we estimate nationwide is the same as the one we observe in the data.
the prediction of the patenting activity in the subsequent years follows the same strategy, with the only exception that when predicting total patents for 2006, the network with lag 1 is applied to predicted patents in 2005, instead of the acutal ones .19we do this to avoid endogeneity concerns that might arise when using contemporaneous patenting activity. table b.2 graphically outlines the exact structure used to build the instrument. predicted patents in the second sub period are then averaged to obtain the instrument for the t 2010 observation.
note that the network we build is a directed one. if a class cz pair is linked to another pair, the opposite is not necessarily true. this contrasts with more common iv approaches used in the past in similar settings. for example, the bartik instrument relies on the mere geographical distribution of innovative activities in the pre sample period, and implicitly assumes that the coef cient of diffusion of ideas from any origin class cz pair is given by the national share of patents of the same class in the destination region. for our purposes, this approach carries some undesirable properties, most notably the inability to separate innovation shocks from industry or technology speci c nationwide trends that ultimately affect innovation, but also have an impact on the dependent variable. as we extensively discuss in section 3.2.2, our approach signi cantly dampens this concern. first, we exploit the richness of the citation data to isolate directed technological linkages, including across classes links, and use it to diffuse lagged innovation output , rather than contemporaneous one . second, our approach is robust to setting to zero the coef cient of diffusion not only for the citations coming from the same region but also for those coming from the same technological class, reducing the concern that predicted patenting growth simply re ects correlated industry trends. third, we can directly control for those nationwide trends by including a bartik like variable directly into our set of controls.
3.2.2 first stage results one of the conditions for the instrument to be valid is that the network of knowledge inferred from the citations patterns is determined in the past but stable over time. this condition can be directly tested by comparing the network in the early sample with its counterpart in the late sample. this is done in three steps. first, we build the network of citations and 19the role of c2005is now evident. we add it to our estimation to avoid that the predicted number of patents in the later years is smaller just because predicted number of patents is used alongside actual patenting activity.
160 2 4 6 8 10 lags 505101520253035frobenius norm stability of the network of ideas  2 1 0 1 2 3 predicted patenting growth 3 2 101234actual patent growth  r2 0.24 0.575figure 3.2 left panel comparison between the frobenius norm of the difference between the real diffusion matrices in the early and in the late samples, and the frobenius norm of the difference between the reshuf ed diffusion matrices in the early and in the late samples. right panel scatter plot of the residuals of actual and instrumented patent growth, after partialling out the standard controls . the scatter plot is weighted by total households in 1990.
compute the coef cients of diffusion separately for the two samples . for each d2f1, . . . , 10g, we take the difference of the two adjacency matrices and calculate its frobenius norm as follow  reald d75 94 d d95 14 d  2 s   r,s,m,n  d75 94 d d95 14 d 2 .
second, for each year between 1975 and 2014, we reshuf e all the patents led in that year under the constraint that after the reshuf ing each commuting zone is assigned the same amount of patents as in the real dataset.20we repeat the same exercise performed in the rst step for this new sample of patents and calculate, reshu f d ed75 94 d ed95 14 d  2 s   r,s,m,n  ed75 94 d ed95 14 d 2 whereed75 94 d anded95 14 d are the citation networks built using the reshuf ed patents.
finally, we calculate the percentage difference between reshu f dand realdfor each d.
this number tells us how far the two real networks are compared to two networks that, while maintaining the same structure and properties of the original ones, are uninformat20we also run the exercise under the constraint that each commuting zone is assigned the same number of patents it started with for each technological class. the results are virtually the same.
17ive of each other. a positive value indicates that the two networks built using the actual data are more similar than the two reshuf ed networks.21figure 3.2 plots the difference for all the values of dtogether with the 95 con dence interval we obtained by repeating this procedure 50 times. the difference of the reshuf ed networks is around 26 higher than the one obtained with the actual networks for the rst lag and it gradually declines until it is indistinguishable from zero at lags 9 and 10. the decline implies that the more years pass after a new idea is generated the less citation patterns are distinguishable from links that are generated at random. this result is quite intuitive. with time a new technology becomes more and more public knowledge and is adopted or embedded in patents produced in areas that do not have any direct link with the city where the technology was originally produced.
consistently with the results in the left panel of figure 3.2, the right panel shows a scatter plot of the rst stage relationship between predicted and actual growth rate of patenting. we plot the residuals of a regression of patent growth on the full set of controls. it is visually clear that the two variables are strongly but not perfectly correlated. the residual r2is 0.24, while the coef cient of the regression is 0.57. the cragg donald wald f statistics in the regression with full set of controls is 223.4, which rules out weak instrument concerns.
figure b.3 in appendix visually compares actual and predicted patent growth at the cz level on a map of the united states, and can be useful to gain intuition on the validity of the instrument. areas that are anecdotally associated with a large expansion of innovation and other knowledge intensive activities are properly captured by the instrument.
3.3 iv results our identi cation strategy captures local changes in patenting that are due to knowledge created in other geographical areas, linked to the original cz through the channels of knowledge diffusion computed in . these channels are pre determined with respect to new ideas themselves. when new knowledge becomes available in a city, innovation intensive activities expand. in this section, we explore the effects of such an expansion on income segregation.
table 3.2 shows the 2sls estimates of the relationship between innovation and segregation, as depicted in . all regressions are weighted by total number of households in 1990. the coef cient on patent growth is positive and statistically signi cant. columns  introduce the set of controls considered for the ols estimates. the coef cient on 21note that this difference is only interpretable in relative terms.
18dep. variable change in segregation , 1990 2010   patenting growth 2.88 2.87 2.84 2.34 2.41 2.40     ct 0.05 1.85 2.45 2.72 2.65     of household 3.49 4.19 4.14 3.96    income 5.65 5.20 5.54    import exposure 0.02 0.03   local govt spending 0.21   obs. 703 703 703 703 687 579 first stage estimates predicted 0.72 0.60 0.60 0.57 0.56 0.57  patenting growth  wald f stat. 388.38 233.96 247.03 205.88 192.35 173.07 r20.36 0.41 0.43 0.44 0.44 0.46 table 3.2 2sls estimates. all regressions are weighted by total number of households in 1990. firststage estimates include all the controls speci c to the model. controls are in growth rates, 1990 2010.
missing observations in columns and re ect data availability at the source and are concentrated in low population regions. robust standard errors in parentheses. p 0.01, p 0.05, p 0.1.
income growth reveals that segregation has increased more in areas with better economic performance. columns of table b.5 in appendix report the results when controls are included at their 1990 values. the coef cient on early sample population reveals that segregation has increased more in larger cities . contrary to the ols regressions, where the full set of controls had a signi cant dampening effect on the size of the coef cient, the 2sls estimates are not signi cantly affected by the introduction of the controls.
a 10 increase in patenting between 1990 and 2010 is estimated to increase income segregation by 0.17 0.23 gini points, depending on the speci cation. since the average growth rate of patents is 16 and the average increase in segregation 2.94, the effect is economically large. the effect is particularly signi cant in accounting for the cross sectional variation in changes in segregation. taking the speci cation with the basic set of controls in growth rates as a reference point, a one residual standard deviation increase in patenting growth increases segregation by 56 of a residual standard deviation in segregation change.
19the 2sls estimates are more than twice as large as the ones in the ols regressions. this suggests that unobservable factors affecting at the same time innovation and segregation tend to operate on the two variables in opposite directions. this is hardly surprising. for example, nancial shocks that generate widespread turmoil on the urban structure are likely to increase segregation while having a dampening effect on the local potential to develop a knowledge based economy.
table b.6 in appendix shows that a similar effect is observed for segregation de ned in terms of educational achievement and occupation type , instead of income level. patent intensity appears to have a strong positive impact on both measures. however, occupational segregation appears to be more tightly connected with income segregation than its educational counterpart a regression of the change in occupational segregation on the change in income segregation yields an r2of 12 , whereas the corresponding gure for educational segregation is only 1.5 .
3.4 instrument validation exclusion restriction the instrument used in the iv analysis is a composite one, as it combines a pre established network of knowledge links and a collection of innovation shocks that are then diffused through it. hence, it requires two main identifying assumptions. first, the network of patent citations should not be capturing long run trends in innovation and segregation. second, shocks that affect innovation in the origin commuting zones should not be correlated with other shocks that affect innovation and segregation in the destination commuting zone other than through the channel identi ed by our instrument.
to address the rst point, we run a number of falsi cation tests to verify to what extent the growth rate of patenting predicted by our instrument re ects long term trends in innovation and segregation. we start by regressing predicted patenting growth on past changes in segregation . figure b.7 and columns of table b.8 show the correlation between our instrument and the pre sample trend in segregation. this correlation is practically equal to 0.22then, we check whether the instrument is correlated with previous trends in innovation, and to what extent this could affect our second stage results. figure b.2 shows the correlation between the residuals of regressions of predicted patenting growth and past trends in patenting growth on the basic set of con22the years we selected to calculate past changes in segregation are dictated by data availability from the census. note that, in the 1980 census, cts were not covering the entirety of the united states, but only the most densely populated areas. for this reason, not all the czs are available for our analysis. this is unlikely to affect our results signi cantly, since all our regressions are weighted by the number of households. however, to make the two exercises readily comparable we re run our benchmark regressions only using the czs available in 1980. columns of table b.8 report the results, which remain mainly unchanged.
20trols. although the coef cient of the two variables have a slightly positive correlation , the r2of the regression is just 0.03, re ecting a very weak correlation. column in table b.4 shows the 2sls regression with the basic set of controls once the past trend in innovation is explicitely controlled for. the coef cient on patenting growth remains positive and signi cant, and is slightly larger in magnitude. this suggests that the correlation of the instrument with past trends in innovation is weak at best and is unlikely to confound our estimated effects.
as for the second point, the main concern is that geographical areas that are linked in the knowledge network have similar characteristics, such as a similar industry structure, geographical proximity, common regulation, or exposure to other shocks that make it hard to disentagle the genuine effect of knowledge shocks from the effect of other factors that have an impact on innovation in the origin cz and segregation in the destination cz. to control for the effect of nationwide industry or technology speci c shocks, we include a bartik like variable in the set of controls. namely, for each cz rwe de ne a vector s1990 r n s1990 1,r, ...,s1990 n,ro , where s1990 m,rdenotes the share of patents in the early sample that belong to technological class mand was produced in cz r. then, for each class cz pair , we compute the growth rate gm, rof the number of grants in that technological class, counting only patents produced outside r, between 1990 and 2010. we then compute the bartik like variable in ras   gr  m2ns1990 m,r gm, r.
this prediction replicates the idea behind a bartik shock, with the distribution of patents across technological classes used in place of the distribution of employment across industries. column in table b.4 shows the 2sls regression once the bartik shock is included in the set of controls. the coef cient on patenting growth is robustly positive and larger in magnitude. again, the inclusion of variables that control directly for industry performance  increases the size of the coef cient, con rming that unobservable shocks tend to operate on income segregation and innovation output in opposite directions.
to provide further evidence that our instrument is not capturing correlated industry trends across technologically linked czs, column of table b.4 replicates the main 2sls, with a version of our instrument in , in which the coef cient of diffusion is set to zero not only when the origin and destination czs coincide, but also when the origin and destination technological classes are the same.23this version of the instrument displays a weaker correlation with observed patenting growth but the coef cient of the iv regression is robustly positive and, again, larger in magnitude compared to our benchmark regression.
lastly, we address the concern of changes in legislation and other geographically correlated unobservable factor by introducing state xed effects in the 2sls estimation of .24 in this case, we are evaluating changes in segregation resulting from an expansion in innovation activities only through within state variation. the results are reported in column of table b.4. the estimated coef cient is smaller, but the share of explained within state variation is still sizeable. one residual standard deviation in patenting growth explains 42.6  of a residual standard deviation the change in segregation. column reports the results when all the controls introduced in this section are included in the iv regression. also in this case the results are robust.
3.5 which technologies are driving the effect  our analysis can be disaggregated to investigate what types of technology are mainly responsible for the estimated effect. this decomposition is possible because our instrument delivers a separate predicted value for patenting in each technology class. it is a widespread belief that segregation has increased more in areas that are intensive in high tech industries. the following quote is taken from florida economic segregation tends to be more intensive in high tech, knowledge based metros. it is positively correlated with high tech industry  ... . by disaggregating the analysis at a technology class level, we can test whether this observation can be interpreted as causal.
the international patent classi cation classi es patents into 8 main technological areas . we aggregate patents from each technology sub class into their respective main technological area . we then run a set of 8 separate 2sls regressions, analogous to the ones shown in section 3.3, with the exception that patenting growth is measured only within a given technological area.
results are shown in table 3.3. the positive effect of patenting on segregation seems to be entirely driven by 4 out of 8 technological areas class a , which include medicine and pharmaceuticals among the others class c class g which include all it and computer sectors and class h which includes all major electronics products. class d , which is arguably the least knowledge intensive one in the ipc, has a negative and signi cant coef cient.
these results are obtained with the full set of controls, including income growth, so they 24this implies that time xed effects in are state speci c.
22dep. variable change in segregation, 1990 2010 area a 3.39 area b 4.18 area c 1.52 area d 1.27    controls x controls x controls x controls x area e 3.95 area f 1.59 area g 4.37 area h 2.88    controls x controls x controls x controls x table 3.3 2sls estimates. all regressions are weighted by total number of households in 1990.
controls are included in growth. robust standard errors in parentheses. p 0.01, p 0.05, p 0.1.
are unlikely to capture exclusively differences in economic outcomes brought about by different types of jobs. however, the reason why knowledge intensive sectors have a disproportionate effect on urban segregation, while less knowledge intensive ones have a negative effect is not obvious. two explanations are the most likely candidates. on the one hand, learning intensive sectors bene t more from learning spillovers and the proximity that such spillovers require.
this produces higher incentives to cluster in space for people in areas where returns from learning are higher. on the other hand, people employed in those sectors might be disproportionally sensible to residential amenities, giving them a higher incentive to cluster in space. the spatial equilibrium model in section 4 will be used to disentangle the contribution of the two candidate explanations to the observed effect.
3.6 segregation and inequality is it sorting  results up to this point show that an expansion of innovation activities has a positive impact on measured segregation, that is, on the variation of income across neighborhoods, within cities. disregarding migration, there are two main phenomena that can induce this.
on the one hand, starting from a city with positive segregation , a divergence in household income leads to an increase in measured segregation, even in the absence of any reallocation of residents across neighborhoods in the city. we refer to this phenomenon as inequality effect . on the other hand, measured segregation can increase even if within city inequality stays the same, if residents choose to relocate across neighborhoods and sort themselves along the income dimension. we refer to this case as sorting effect .
the two phenomena can be used to think about the link between segregation and inequality in an intuitive way. the inequality effect allows us to connect changes in inequality 23dep. variable  dineq cz dsegr cz dct ineq   patenting growth 0.93 2.34 1.48 0.86 0.36   dineq cz 0.96    obs. 703 703 703 703 703 controls x x x x table 3.4 2sls estimates. all regressions are weighted by total number of households in 1990.
controls are included in growth. robust standard errors in parentheses. p 0.01, p 0.05, p 0.1.
with changes in segregation in the case where initial segregation is complete . in this case, it is clear that the following identity holds  dineq cz dsegr cz.
since in reality initial segregation is never complete, in the absence of relocation an increase in inequality will in general induce a smaller change in segregation  dineq cz dsegr cz.
hence, changes in inequality can always be interpreted as upper bounds in terms of the effects on measured segregation.
as for the sorting effect, segregation can increase, as a result of the relocation of high  income households towards initially high income neighborhoods, even if dineq cz  0. in what follow, we discipline how much of the observed effect can be due to inequality and how much to sorting effects.
in table 3.4, we provide a comparison of the impact of patenting on segregation and inequality within city. speci cally, we estimate using alternatively segr czand ineq czas dependent variables. innovation does have a positive impact on inequality. however, since the effect on segregation is larger than the one on within cz inequality, the two regressions taken together imply that the sorting effect is contributing signi cantly to the change in segregation.
in column , we estimate using dsegr czas dependent variable, and including dineq czas a control. the coef cient on dineq czis 0.93, suggesting an almost complete transmission of inequality to segregation. moreover, the coef cient that measures the effect of patenting growth on dsegr czdrops accordingly by roughly one third, but remains positive 24and signi cant. this implies that roughly two thirds of the impact of innovation shocks on segregation can be explained as a sorting effect, whereas the remaining third as an inequality effect.
the impact of an innovation shock on within neighborhood inequality is ex ante ambiguous, since the inequality and sorting effects operate on opposite directions. on the one hand, the positive impact on dineq czimplies that, if people were not allowed to relocate, we would observe a positive effect on within ct inequality, as well.25on the other hand, the sorting effect works to counteract the impact of within city on within ct inequality. the last two columns of table 3.4 report the parameter estimates using average within ct inequality as left hand side variable. patenting growth has a small negative coef cient, that becomes statistically indistinguishable from zero when we add the baseline controls to the regression. this suggests that the sorting effect completely offsets the increase in the dispersion of income within ct that stems from the inequality effect.
3.7 exploration of the mechanism in the previous subsections, we showed the existence of a strong, causal relationship between the expansion of local knowledge based activities and income segregation in u.s. cities. we further showed that this effect is also visible along an educational and occupational dimension and is mostly driven by technological elds with high technological content and learning intensity such as physics and chemistry. this result suggests that high returns from learning spillovers can increase incentives for companies whose output has a high knowledge content to cluster in space to take advantage of highly localized learning opportunities, inducing a positive link between innovation intensity and concentration of knowledgeintensive rms. in addition, high education, high salary workers might optimally relocate in the surrounding areas to minimize their commuting costs. the endogenous response of residential externalities can play an important role in amplifying this effect.
the structural model presented in section 4 formalizes this mechanism. the goal of this subsection is to provide suggestive reduced form evidence in its support. first, we show that innovation shocks promote the geographical concentration of knowledge workers towards neighborhoods with high learning opportunities. second, we show that the impact of 25in the extreme case in which the income distribution for each ct is identical to the one in the city, an increase in inequality at a city level would translate into a one to one increase of average within ct inequality. on the other hand, if people were perfectly sorted along the income dimension, an increase in city level inequality would have no impact on within ct inequality.
25innovation shocks is stronger in cities whose neighborhoods are less anchored to natural amenities, highlighting the potential role of endogenous residential externalities in driving the process.
3.7.1 clustering of employment one possible mechanism behind the results described in section 3.3 is the change in the concentration of employment of knowledge intensive occupations that is induced by a knowledge shock. the fact that knowledge spillovers are strongly localized has been con rmed by multiple studies, starting from jaffe et al. . when useful knowledge becomes available and innovation opportunities emerge, incentives to cluster in space to bene t from them are positively affected. this in turn has a direct effect on residential segregation, provided that work location affects residential choices, .
to confront this intuition, we rst verify that in cities with high innovation shocks, knowledge intensive employment moves towards neighborhoods with strong learning opportunities. our measure of knowledge spillovers at the neigborhood level is adapted from ahlfeldt et al. , and is based on the structural model outlined in section 4.3. the index captures the concentration of knowledge workers surrounding a given neighborhood.26 speci cally, for each ct jin city cz, knowledge externalities in 1990 are computed as  lkk j  l2scze dktjlwk l kl, wheresczis the set of neighborhoods in cz,tjlis the commuting time between cts jand l,wk lis the number of knowledge workers employed in lin 1990 and klis the area ofl. the parameter dkcontrols the rate of decay of knowledge externalities and is estimated in section 4.6.
our conjecture is that, in cities that receive strong knowledge shocks, knowledge occupations will cluster into neighborhoods with high externalities. letting sk j,czbe the percentage of knowledge workers in ct j2s cz, and letting rank j,czbe the percentile of jin the distribution of lkkwithin czin 1990, we estimate via 2sls the following equation  dsk j,cz acz brank j,cz grank j,cz dlog ej,cz.  we cluster standard errors at the cz level and weight each ct by the total number of work26see appendix a for details on the classi cation of occupations and the construction of the distribution of residents by occupation at the neighborhood level.
26dep. variable dsk j  ols iv rank j patenting growth 0.87 1.75    rank j 2.29 2.12    cz fixed effects x x  obs. 57,285 57,285 table 3.5 regressions are weighted by total number of workers in 1990. standard errors are clustered at the cz level. p 0.01, p 0.05, p 0.1.
ers in 1990. a positive sign for the coef cient of the interaction, g, suggests that neighborhoods with high learning opportunities in 1990, in cities where the knowledge shock has been stronger, have experienced a more pronounced shift towards knowledge intensive occupations. the ols and iv estimates of 3.4 are displayed in table 3.5. the interaction term has a positive and signi cant coef cient, that is meaningful in magnitude. combining the estimates of bandg, we can see that in cities at the 95th percentile of the distribution of innovation shocks, cts at the top of the distribution of lkkin 1990 experienced a shift in the composition of employment towards knowledge occupations about 3.52 percentage points higher than cts at the bottom of the distribution of lkkin 1990. the corresponding gure, in cities at the 5th percentile of the distribution of innovation shocks, is sign cantly smaller .
3.7.2 the role of residential amenities as mentioned in the previous subsection, the fact that high knowledge rms cluster in space might directly in uence residential choices of workers through commuting costs considerations. this process could be ampli ed by the existence of endogenous residential spillovers that are disproportionately valuable to high education, high salary workers. for example, a high concentration of creative workers might attract amenities such as elite schools or tness centers, to which other types of workers might be less sensible.
to check whether residential amenities play a role in promoting the increase in segregation observed in the data, we exploit the index of natural amenities assembled by lee and lin . the authors build an index based on the distance to natural amenities or the presence of steady features for each census tract contained in a metropolitan statistical area . in their paper, they show that msas where the index variance is higher are also msas whose spatial income distribution has remained more persistent over time. our idea is that cities that incorporate residential amenities whose 27dep. variable dsegr  ols ols iv iv patenting growth 0.65 0.78 1.99 2.11    persistent amenities 0.32 0.29   persistent amenities 0.45 0.63   patenting growth  controls x x x x  obs. 337 337 337 337 table 3.6 all regressions are weighted by total number of households in 1990. controls are included in growth. number of observations re ect data availability from lee and lin . the index of persistent amenities is normalized to have a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one. robust standard errors in paranthesis. p 0.01, p 0.05, p 0.1.
valuation is unlikely to be altered by the surrounding distribution of residents, should also be cities where the residential spillover channel is weaker. in other words, the presence of extremely valuable amenities that are exogenous relative to the geography of the city should have a dampening effect to the residential agglomeration forces documented in the previous sections, since the endogenous spillovers would play a more marginal role.
we rst assign every ct contained in the lee and lin s dataset to a cz and, following their methodology, we calculate the standard deviation of the amenities index for each city.27we then introduce this term and its interaction with patenting growth to our baseline regression model. a negative coef cient for the interaction term indicates that cities whose variation in residential amenities is more anchored to natural or persistent features, experience a less pronounced change in income segregation following an innovation shock. columns 2 and 4 of table 3.6 report the ols and iv results of such a regression. as expected, the parameter associated with the interaction term is negative and statistcically signi cant at a 10 level. the magnitude of the coef cient is economically large. the point estimate implies that cities ranked at the 95th percentile in their degree of persistent residential amenities display a marginal effect of knowledge shocks on income segregation equal to 0.84 gini points, less than a quarter of the marginal impact in a city at the 5th percentile of the distribution . this suggests that residential amenities play indeed an important role in amplifying the effect of innovation shocks on income segregation.
27note that since the msas do not cover the whole u.s. territory, for this exercise we are able to use data from 337 cities only.
283.8 taking stock the empirical analysis shows a robust and economically meaningful causal relationship between the expansion of innovation activities and the increase in income segregation in u.s. cities between 1990 and 2010. this effect is stronger for learning intensive elds and weaker for less knowledge intensive elds . less than 50 of this effect can be explained by an increase of income inequality, suggesting that knowledge intensity generates incentives for people to sort in space along income, occupational and educational dimensions. as a potential mechanism, we provide evidence suggesting that innovation shocks induce an increase in the geographical concentration of employment of knowledge intensive occupations, which can affect income segregation if the location of employment is linked to residential choices, and the endogenous response of residential amenities can work as an important ampli cation channel.
in the next section, we propose a structural model of the internal structure of cities that formalizes and quanti es such mechanism. we augment the model developed in arsw to allow for a creative, knowledge intensive sector and a residual non creative sector. the model features occupation speci c productivity and residential externalities, generating a variety of motives for job clustering and residential sorting. the exogenous innovation shocks derived in the empirical analysis allow us to structurally estimate the parameters controlling the strength of such externalities. the model is successful in replicating the key empirical relationships, and can be used to investigate the factors that drive them.
4 model we consider an economy comprising a nite set of cities c. in what follows, we present the model for an arbitrary city c2c, and suppress the city index for notational convenience.
our setting expands arsw by allowing for multiple cities and worker types. we refer to the original paper and its appendix for some of the derivations and details.
4.1 demand a city c2c comprises a nite set of neighborhoods s. agents differ intrinsically by their background, or sector in which they operate. there is a creative sector kand a residual sector n, to which each worker inelastically supplies one unit of labor. the utility function 29of worker oof type x2fk,ng, living in neighborhood iand working in jis given by ux ijo zijo dijbx i cx ijo b b hx ijo 1 b 1 b  where cijois a tradable consumption good , hijois consumption of housing of price qi,bx irepresents residential amenities, and zijois a frechet distributed random variable with shape parameter 1. the term dij ektijrepresents iceberg commuting costs, with tijdenoting commuting times from itoj, and k 0 a parameter controlling the sensitivity to commuting. every worker maximizes her utility subject to cx ijo qihx ijo wx j, where wx jis the wage that workers of type xreceive when working in ct j. utility maximization yields hx ijo wx j qi, cx ijo bwx j.
using the two optimality conditions, we can write the indirect utility function as ux ijo bx izijo dijwx jb 1.  upon moving to the city, each agent receives a collection of frechet distributed independent draws, one for each pair of residence and workplace neighborhoods, and chooses the pair that delivers the highest utility. using the indirect utility function in  and the properties of the frechet distribution, we can calculate the share of workers oof type xchoosing to live in ct iand work in ct j  px ij  bx iwx j  dijq1 b i    l,m2s s  bx lwxm  dlmq1 b l fx ij fx.  summing over the work locations, we get the share of people of type xwho live in neighborhood i  px ri  j2spx ij  j2sfx ij fx.  30similarly, the share of workers of type xwho work in jcan be expressed as px wj  i2spx ij  i2sfx ij fx.  the probability of commuting to jconditional on living in iis given by px ijji  wx j dij    l2s  wx l dil  therefore, the measure of people of type xwho work in j, denoted by wx j, is given by wx j  l2s  wx j dlj    m2s px ljrx,  where rxis the amount of residents of type xliving in the city.28 using the conditional probability derived in , we can calculate the expected wage of type xconditional on living in neighborhood i  e wxji  k2s  wx k dik    l2s  wx l dil wx k, which is the average wage received by workers of type xin ct kweighted by the probability of working there, conditional on living in i.
the distribution of utilities of type xfor each type in the city is given by gx e fxu .
to see this, note that the probability that the utility of an agent of type xchosen at random in the city is higher than u, 1 gx, is equal to the probability that her utility is bigger or equal to ufor at least one residence workplace pair, or equivalently to 1 minus the probability that her utility is smaller than ufor all the residence workplace combinations  1 gx 1  l,m2s sgx lm, 28note that rx jwx j irx i, where rx iis the mass of residents of type xin ct i.
31where gx ij e fx iju  is the utility distribution of workers of type xliving in iand working in j. from here it is easy to see that e ux g  1 1   1  where gis the gamma function. the expected utility when deciding to move into the city must be equal to the reservation utility ux, that is constant across cities.
4.2 production each neighborhood jhosts a representative, perfectly competitive rm of each sector x2 fk,ng. the rm hires sector speci c labor and rents of ce space, and aggregates them into a homogeneous nal good according to a cobb douglas production function  yx j ax j  hx j 1 a  wx j a , where yx jis output of rm xin ct j,ax jis its total factor productivity, and hx jis total of ce space rented by the representative rm.
pro t maximization gives ax j wx j hx j a  qj, aax j hx j wx j 1 a  wx j.  combining the focs with the zero pro t condition yields qx j  a wx j a  ax j 1  .  4.3 residential and productivity externalities the terms bx iand ax jsummarize the location s residential and productivity characteristics.
we assume them to be geometric functions of the concentration of economic activity around the relevant location. elasticities are occupation speci c, so that the intensity of the externalities depend on the type of resident or worker who is generating and bene ting from them.
we de ne density of residents of type x22fk,ngaround residents of type x12fk,ng in neighborhood ias wx1x2 i  l2se rx1tilrx2 l kl,  32where rx1is the rate of decay of residential externalities perceived by residents of type x1, and klis the area in ct l.29then, residential amenities for type x1in location iare bx1 i bx1 i  wx1x1 i wx1x1  wx1x2 i wx1x2,  where wx1x1 represents the elasticitiy of residential externalities from residents of type x2 to residents of type x1, and bx1 iis an exogenous term that captures the component of residential amenities that is not affected by the surrounding economic activity.
similarly, we de ne the density of employment of type xaround workers of type k in neighborhood jas lkx j  l2se dktjlwx l kl,  where dkis the rate of decay of productivity externalities perceived by workers of type x.
then, the productivitiy term for type kin location jis ak j ak j  lkk j lkk  lkn j lkn,  where lkk represents the elasticitiy of productivity externalities from workers of type k to workers of type k, and ak jis an exogenous term that captures the component of productivity that is not affected by the surrounding economic activity. in the structural estimation of section 4.6, we allow lkk to depend on the city speci c knowledge shocks that were estimated in the empirical analysis.
we mantain the assumption that the productivity terms for the non creative occupations, an j, are stagnant, and are not affected by local externalities, so that an j an jfor all neighborhoods. this assumption is consistent with davis and dingel , in which only workers who select themselves in knowledge intensive occupations bene t from the concentration of learning opportunities in large cities. as discussed in section 4.6, our quantitative results support this interpretation.
4.4 equilibrium we now have all the elements to de ne an equilibrium of the model.
de nition 4.1. given quantities  tij  i,j2s s2andn li,ki,  ax i,bx i  x2fk,ngo i2s2 29this functional form is consistent with the intuition given by lucas and rossi hansberg on how knowledge spillovers are generated.
33and reservation utilities uk, un  , an equilibrium is a set of quantity and pricesn  px ri,px wi,rx i,wx i,wx i,ax i,bx i  x2fk,ng,qio i2s, so that, for each type x2fk,ng   expected utility of moving into the city equals the reservation utility g  1 1     l2s  m2s  dlm1 b   1   ux  the share of population living in iis given by   the share of population working in jis given by   land markets clear for each i2s    x2fk,ng ax i qi 1 a wx i  x2fk,ng2 64  l2s  wx l dil    m2s wl3 75rx i qi li  productivity and residential externalities are determined by and , respectively  factor prices satisfy , so that rms make zero pro ts  labor markets clear  rx i px ri  l2srx l, wx j px wj  l2swx l, rx  l2srx l  l2swx l wx.
the fact that residential amenities and productivities are subject to local externalities gives rise to the potential for multiple equilibria. as discussed by arsw, the structure of the model allows to deal with this multiplicity directly by identifying a unique set of location characteristics that is compatible with the data, so that only the observed equilibrium is relevant for the estimation of the model s parameters.
4.5 recovering wages and location characteristics from data the structure of the model allows us to recover unobserved location characteristics starting from data on residents by sector,  rk i,rn i  i2s, workers by sector,n wk j,wn jo j2s, and rental 34price of oor space, fqigi2s, bilateral commuting times,  tij  i,j2s, and average wage by sector in the city, wk c, wn c  , given knowledge of the parameters kand c. the equilibrium conditions can then be inverted to univocally identify wages by sector,n wk j,wn jo j2s, residential amenities  bk i,bn i  i2s, and productivitiesn ak j,an jo j2s.
we rst discuss how we obtain an estimate for the city speci c parameter controlling the sensitivity to commuting, nc ck. we then discuss how to pin down local wages by sector.
finally, we show how to recover the values of residential amenities and productivities. the data sources used for this purpose are described in details in appendix a.
estimating sensitivity to commuting times we allow the parameter that controls the sensitvity of the utility function to commuting times to vary by city. taking logs of yields a gravity equation for commuting ows from ct ito ct j  log  px ij   ax yx i zx j nctij hx ij  where nc ck, and yx iandzx jare residence and workplace xed effects, respectively. since there are no comprehensive measures of commuting ows by occupation, we approximate a single gravity equation for commuting ows by estimating one equation of the same form for each city  log  pij a yi zj nctij hij.  we show in the appendix that an alternative method for estimating nc, based on replicating the observed share of residents commuting for less than 60 minutes from their workplace, yields very consistent results.
we estimate by ols separately for each city using data on actual commuting ows from the longitudinal employer household dynamics dataset. the distribution of estimates of ncis illustrated in figure b.4. the median value is 0.041, which implies that one additional minute of commuting time decreases commuting probability by 4.1 .30 recovering wages, residential amenities and productivities for given values of kand c, wages by sector in each location are uniquely determined by the following system of 2 jsjequations  wx j  i2s  wx j c enctij  l2s  wx l c enctilrx i,  30the results are consistent with the ones in arsw, who estimate a value of 0.07 for the same parameter.
35where  wx i,rx i  i2sare observed in the data, and where an appropriate normalization of the wages is chosen, so that the average wage in the city is equal to the observed counterpart in the data, wx c. we choose units so that the geometric mean of the non creative sector s wage in the cz with the rst index is equal to one.31 given a value for aand knowingfqigi2sandn wk j,wn jo j2s, productivitiesn ak j,an jo j2s can be recovered from equation . then, given values for fdk,dngandflx1x2gx1,x22s and observed areas fkigi2s, the exogenous component of productivityn ak j,an jo j2scan be obtained by combining and .
given values for candb, observed data for  rk i,rn i,qi  i2s, and the equilibrium wagesn wk j,wn jo j2s, combining and allows us to recover residential amenities  bk i,bn i  i2s  bx i rx i rx 1  c0  ux g  1 1  c 1 aq1 b i wx i 1 cx2fk,ng,  where wx i j  wx j dij e . we choose units so that the geometric mean of residential amenities for both types in the cz with the rst index is equal to one. this choice of units allows us to recover the unobserved value of the reservation utility uxand to evaluate  for the remaining cities.32 4.6 structural estimation we follow arsw and set a 0.8,b 0.75 and k 0.01 in our calibration, which implies  c nc 0.01.33in order to estimate the remaining parameters we exploit the differential change in the concentration of economic activity in cities between 1990 and 2010 that results from differential changes in knowledge intensity, as recovered in the empirical analysis. in particular, we rely on the orthogonality between the inferred innovation shocks and other factors that affect the 31see lemma s.7 in the supplement to arsw for a proof that the system of equations in determine a unique vector of wagesn wx jo j2s.
32one additional normalization is required to de ne units in which oor space is denominated. we normalize the price of oor space, qi, so that the geometric mean in memphis is equal to one.
33following allen et al. , we also estimated cusing a model generated instrument together with the xed effects obtained from the gravity equation . although the con dence interval includes values strictly greater than 1 for 96 of the commuting zones, the point estimate is smaller than 1 in 20 of the cases, including in some major cities such as los angeles and new york. for this reason, we use the arsw estimates and set k 0.01 for our analysis. interestingly, the weighted and unweighted mean of kcobtained through the procedure proposed by allen et al. is very close to this value. details of the procedure and results are provided in the appendix.
36geographical distribution of economic activity in the city. the model captures those residual factors as changes in the exogenous components of productivity and residential amenities, ax jand bx j. our orthogonality condition imposes that changes in the average of the exogenous components within a city are independent from the innovation shock the same city receives.
to introduce innovation shocks, we assume that the elasticity of productivity externalities for the creative sector lkkis identical across cities in 1990 , but varies in 2010 depending on the city speci c value of the knowledge shock  l10 kk,c l90 kk q0 q1 binc  where q0andq1are estimated jointly with the remaining parameters, and bincis the value of the knowledge shock for city c, as described below.
to make the orthogonality condition operational, we proceed in three steps. first, we compute for each city the predicted patenting growth, as outlined in section 3.2.1   gc log patc,05 14 log patc,85 94.  second, we take the residuals of a regression of gcon the set of basic controls . third, we sort cities according to those residuals into 10 bins, so that the sum of the population of all the cities in the bin is approximately equal for all the bins . the resulting categorization determines the value of the knowledge shock introduced in . the orthogonality condition can then be expressed as 8    ec2cbin  d10 90ei2sclog  ax i ec2c  d10 90ei2sclog  ax i  ec2cbin  d10 90ei2sclog  bx i ec2c  d10 90ei2sclog  bx i  for all bin2f0, ..., 9gand x2fk,ng. in , all expectations are weighted by total population in the neighborhood. for a xed set of parameters, and given observed data on residents, workers and price of housing , residential and productivity fundamentals can be recovered by combining with  and with , respectively.
condition requires that cities with different knowledge shocks do not display systematic differences in the way residual fundamentals change between 1990 and 2010. hence, the systematic difference in how the concentration of economic activity changes must be due to the combination of the the change in the production function of the creative sector 37assigned parameters structural estimation a 0.80 wnn 0.04 wnk 0.18 b 0.75 wkn 0.02 wkk 0.32 k 0.01 lkn 0.12 lkk 0.31 nc figure b.4 rn 0.467 rk 0.497 dk 0.055 q0 0.004 q1 0.001 table 4.1 parameter values induced by the knowledge shock, and the endogenous agglomeration forces in the model.
the system in delivers 3 10 moment conditions for a set of 11 parameters to estimate 34 p frn,rk,dk,wnn,wnk,wkn,wkk,lkn,lkk,q0,q1g.
our estimation routine sets the value of the parameters, p , in such a way as to minimize the sum of the squares of the moment conditions  p argminp2pmwm0 wherewis the optimal weighting matrix. details on the estimation algorithm can be found in appendix c.2.
the results of the estimation are displayed in the right panel of table 4.1. the rates of decay of residential externalities are close to the corresponding estimates in arsw , and suggest that residential externalities are slightly more localized for knowledge workers. the rate of decay of productivity spillovers for knowledge workers is lower than the estimate in arsw and points in the direction that learning externalities, albeit localized, have a larger geographical span than other types of productivity spillovers.35the estimated value of dkimplies that a 10 minutes commuting time reduces the strength of the externality by roughly 42 .
two additional considerations stand out. first, as suggested by the similar estimated values of wnnandwnk, residential externalities perceived by non creative workers are closer across the two types than externalities that knowledge workers receive from neighbors of both types. these are very steep for knowledge workers , and signi cantly lower for residents of the opposite type . this dichotomy suggests that, fol34note that since we assume lnn lnk 0, the moment conditions involving an ido not identify any relevant parameter.
35incidentally, when productivity spillovers for n workers are included in the estimation, the routine delivers an explosive value of dn, roughly equal to 10, which implies that productivity spillovers for non creative workers are extremely localized, possibly limited to the rm s boundaries.
380 2 4 6 8 10 bin 1.0 0.50.00.51.01.52.02.53.0 segregation model datafigure 4.1 knowledge shock and change in segregation, 1990 2010 data and model.
lowing an initial shock to the distribution of employment, the ampli cation effect of local amenities on the distribution of residents can be large. second, workers in the creative sector receive very steep productivity externalities from other knowledge workers, and less powerful externalities from non creative workers.
4.7 quantitative exploration in this section, we rst explore to what extent the estimated model can account for the observed relationship between innovation and income segregation, and then perform counterfactual experiments to shed light on the underlying mechanism.
we proceed as follows. for each city in the sample, we rst compute the model equilibrium using data on residents and workers by type, and rental price of housing in 1990. we then recover the exogenous component of productivity and residential amenities,  ax i,bx i  , as described in section 4.5. in running the counterfactuals, we keep the value of the location characteristics xed at the inferred 1990 level, and change exclusively the value of lkkin order to re ect the corresponding knowledge shock, as in equation . the algorithm used to nd the new equilibrium can be found in appendix c.3. note that the endogenous agglomeration forces can give rise to multiple equilibria. the recursion used in the following experiments looks for the equilibrium that is closer to the original one.
we present our results in bin scatter plots, so that each dot in the gure corresponds to the weighted average of the observations in the knowledge shock bin, as de ned in section 4.6.
39the dotted line represents the predicted values in the following weighted ols regression  dy90 10 cz a g bincz ecz, where the left hand side variable varies according to the speci cation. since the model does not target the average change in segregation, we shift the resulting values by a uniform factor, in such a way as to make the average for the rst bin equal to zero, and explore the ability of the model to explain the differential change in segregation between cities with different knowledge shocks.
figure 4.1 shows the model performance in replicating the empirical relationship between the estimated knowledge shock and the change in segregation between 1990 and 2010. the model replicates the empirical relationship closely the slope of the regression line is 0.22 for the data, and 0.27 for the model. a weighted regression of the change in segregation in the data and in the model yields a coef cient of 0.13, which suggests a large correlation, even if the only perturbance in the model is the change in lkkprescribed by the bin.
the model is also successful in replicating the empirical relationship between knowledge shocks and change in occupational segregation . the model coef cient is not signi cantly different from the empirical one . table 4.2 also clari es that occupational segregation is one of the dimensions along which knowledge shocks translate into higher income segregation. as shown in the right columns of table 4.2, when controlling for the change in occupational segregation, the coef cients on income segregation drop by about a third in both the model and the data regressions. since occupational segregation does not depend on changes in the level or the dispersion of income, this effect only translates into higher sorting, and does not appear in the inequality effect.
the model also captures the relationship between knowledge shocks and clustering of employment in knowledge intensive occupations. table in b.6 appendix replicates the results in table 3.5 using the bin value of the knowledge shock for the model counterfactuals  and the data . neighborhoods with strong learning externalities in 1990 experience a more pronounced increase in the share of knowledge workers in highbin cities rather than in low bin cities. the coef cient of the interaction terms in the model regression is larger in magnitude than the empirical counterpart, but is consistent in sign and statistical signi cance. notice that none of the quantities in figure 4.1 and table 4.2 and b.6 appear as a target in the structural estimation.
figure 4.2 shows the baseline change in segregation in the model simulation  and the change in segregation that results exclusively from the reallocation of workers across 40dep. variable  docc gini dsegr model data model data bin 0.60 0.51 0.27 0.18 0.22 0.14    docc gini 0.14 0.15     obs. 663 663 663 663 663 663 r20.02 0.24 0.12 0.68 0.10 0.14 table 4.2 all regressions are weighted by total number of households in 1990. robust standard errors in parentheses. p 0.01, p 0.05, p 0.1.
neighborhoods following the shocks, keeping the average income by occupation for each neighborhood and occupation xed at its original 1990 level. this measure captures the portion of the sorting effect that realizes along the occupational dimension, and translates in units of income segregation the occupational sorting observed in table 4.2. the slope of the blue line can be interpreted as a lower bound for the contribution of the sorting effect to the overall response of segregation to knowledge shocks.
4.7.1 endogenous vs exogenous residential amenities finally, we use the model to isolate the role of learning externalities and evolving residential amenities in driving the response of income segregation to innovation shock. disentangling the relative importance of those two candidate factors is of crucial importance for the design of policies aimed at attenuating the rise in segregation, from the improvement of the transit system to changes in the provision of local public goods. as discussed in section 4.6, the estimated values for residential elasticities suggests that the endogenous amenities generated by the concentration of residents in the creative sector are valued disproportionately more by residents of the same type. emblematic examples may include high quality schools, walkable areas, tness centers or organic grocery stores. hence, an initial shock to the distribution of residence generated, for example, by a reshuf ing of the distribution of employment can be signi cantly ampli ed by the endogenous response of residential amenities.
figure 4.3 shows the results of a counterfactual experiment, in which residential amenities are exogenously given . this is equivalent to assume that the elasticities of residential externalities are equal to zero. the resulting relationship is signi cantly atter than the benchmark, suggesting that the ampli cation mechanism can be 410 2 4 6 8 10 bin 1.0 0.50.00.51.01.52.02.53.0 segregation or inequality full model sorting effectfigure 4.2 knowledge shock and change in segregation, 1990 2010 full effect  and sorting effect computed as segregation with 1990 distribution of average wages by ct occupation and 2010 distribution of residents by ct occupation.
quite large. the coef cient of the regression in the counterfactual is 0.09, whereas the coef cient in the benchmark model is equal to 0.27. comparing the two coef cients, we conclude that two thirds of the overall estimated impact of knowledge shocks on income segregation can be attributed to the amplifying effect of localized, occupation speci c residential amenities.36 4.7.2 chicago bids for amazon hq2 at the beginning of september 2017, amazon announced its intention of adding a second north american headquarter to the one already existing in seattle. by the end of the month more than 50 cities across the united states and canada, including chicago, had publicly considered to submit a bid, for a total of more than 100 proejcts.37in this section, we illustrate how our model can be used for policy experiments by assessing the impact of each bid on chicago s city structure. six projects, each in a distinct location, were deposited by city developers. the project located furthest north plans to redevelop the area by the river that is now occupied by the former a. finkl sons steel plant, which was demolished in 2011. the second proposal for amazon s hq2 would be located a couple of miles south 36another implication is that the relationship between the change in segregation in the data and in the model is atter than in the model with endogenous amenities. a regression of the change in segregation in the model with exogenous amenities and the data yields a coef cient of 0.03, compared to the 0.13 of the full model.
37 amazon refuses arizona s cactus as bidders for hq2 climb to 118, the seattle times , september 19, 2017.
map updated october 19, 2017.
420 2 4 6 8 10 bin 1.0 0.50.00.51.01.52.02.53.0 segregation or inequality endogenous amenities exogenous amenitiesfigure 4.3 knowledge shock and change in segregation 1990 2010 exogenous vs endogenous residential amenities.
east towards the loop, and it would be composed of four new buildings overlooking the river in the property owned by tribune media at 700 w. chicago avenue. three other projects were proposed just west of the loop one in the old main post of ce another plans to redevelop union station in different stages and the last one would be just be just south of the loop. being the 3 projects in a radius of less than one mile from each other, for the purpose of our counterfactual analysis, we only consider the one in the old main post of ce which lies in the middle of the two. the last project is the only one located in the south side and would be built over the michael reese hospital which caesed activity in 2009. figure e.1 in the appendix shows the exact location of the four projects considered in this simulation.
for this analysis, we rst estimate the equilibrium quantities in 2010, and we then shock the exogenous term of productivities. the shock is calibrated to attract about 50,000 highknowledge workers in the considered neighborhood. this number matches the number of workers amazon expects to employ in its second headquarter. figure 4.4 shows the forecasted change in high knowledge residents in the four scenarios. the rst panel considers the scenario in which the headquarter is located on the premises of the former michael reese hospital, the second panel the scenario in which it is located in the old main post of ce, the third panel the tribune media scenario, whereas the last panel the former a. finkl sons steel plant. there are two main trends that is possible to identify by comparing the four counterfactuals. first, in all the considered scenarios high skilled high salary workers tend to move in the high amenities areas by the lake and downtown. second, despite this general 43figure 4.4 change in high knowledge residents in each census tract of chicago as a result of amazon s new headquarter locating in a speci c neighborhood . panel considers the case in which amazon s hq2 is located on the old michael reese hospital premises  panel when it is located in the old main post of ce panel in the tribune media river front property panel in the old a. finkl sons steel plant. for each counterfactual, the distribution of the change is divided in 5 quantiles. the census tracts colored in bright red correspond to the top quantile, the ones in bright blue to the bottom quantile.
trend, the location of the headquarter seems to matter a lot for local development. on the one extreme, in the michael reese hospital s scenario, high knowledge workers start moving in the south side. the areas around the university of chicago and along the coast seem to be the most attractive. on the other extreme, in the a. finkl sons steel plant s project, the majority of the gains are concentrated in the richer north side. this is also re ected in the estimated changes in segregation 1 gini point in the former case, and 1.3 gini points in the latter. according to our simulations the city would experience the highest change in segregation if the amazon campus was located on the tribune media s property. figure e.2 in the appendix shows the change in high knowledge workers in the four cases.
44it is important to point out two caveats. first, some of these projects also include an expansion of the public transportation system. this might reduce the overall segregation, although it should not affect the local development results. second, our model does not include a notion of migration. all the 50,000 high knowledge workers attracted by the new campus all come from the commuting zone of chicago. taking migration into consideration might make the segregation effect worse, since rents in high demand neighborhoods would increse more than in our counterfactuals.
5 conclusions we have shown that the rise of an innovation based economy is causally linked to the surge in income segregation experienced by u.s. cities in the last decades. our instrumental variable results imply that local innovation trends are responsible for 56 of the cross sectional variation, and 20 of the overall change in measured segregation. we have further showed that the estimated effect is driven by innovation in learning intensive sectors , and can be only partially explained as a consequence of an increasing dispersion of income.
our interpretation relies on the view that local knowledge shocks increase the returns from localized learning externalities, providing incentives for companies in knowledge intensive sectors to cluster geographically. this in turn affects residential segregation, as workers in creative occupations relocate to live closer to their place of employment. but therein lies a powerful ampli cation mechanism, as the endogenous response of residential amenities, valued disproportionately by the creative class, makes the overall change in residential segregation more pronounced. a quantitative model of the internal structure of cities, estimated using detailed neighborhood level data on residence and employment in u.s. cities, predicts that as much as 66 of the overall effect can explained as the result of the endogenous evolution of localized, occupation speci c residential amenities.
the rise of the knowledge economy is profoundly changing the way we live and interact.
the increasing economic divide in areas experiencing rapid growth in their innovative sectors has often been cited as one of the main challenges that advanced economies will need to face in their near future, as it brings about social unrest and political instability. understanding its causes is a crucial step in properly designing policies aimed at confronting it, and making sure this secular shift happens in an inclusive way. those suggested policies include improvements in the public transit system, supply of affordable housing, and change in the way public goods, such as schooling, are provided. our quantitative framework, 45which combines state of the art techniques from urban economics with newly constructed datasets on patenting and on the geographical distribution of creative occupations in the universe of u.s. cities, is especially suitable to study the effects of those policies. this is left for future research.
46references