articleurban analytics and city science linking urban sprawl and income segregation  findings from a stylized agent based model cheng guo department of computational landscape ecology, helmholtz centre for environmental research ufz, germany carsten m buchmann department of computational landscape ecology, helmholtz centre for environmentalresearch ufz, germany university of hohenheim, germany nina schwarz department of computational landscape ecology, helmholtz centre for environmentalresearch ufz, germany faculty of geo information science and earth observation ,university of t wente, the netherlands abstract urban sprawl and income segregation are two undesired urban patterns that occur during urbandevelopment. empirical studies show that income level and inequality are positively correlatedwith urban sprawl and income segregation, respectively. however, the relationship between urbansprawl and income segregation is not only rarely investigated but also shows ambiguous empiricalresults when it is. therefore, in this study, we built a stylized agent based model with individualbehaviours based on alonso s bid rent theory and ran simulations with different combinations ofincome level and income inequality. we measured the overall emergent patterns with indicators for urban sprawl and income segregation. the model confirms the established positive correlations between income level and urban sprawl and between income inequality andsegregation. furthermore, the model shows a negative correlation between urban sprawl andincome segregation under free market conditions. the model indicates that without any policyimplementation, a city will either suffer from urban sprawl or income segregation. thus, this studyserves as a starting point to study the effects of different urban planning policies on these twourban problems.
keywords agent based modelling, income segregation, urban sprawl corresponding author  cheng guo, department of computational landscape ecology, helmholtz centre for environmental research ufz, 04318 leipzig, germany.email cheng.guo ufz.deenvironment and planning b urban analytics and city science 0 1 21  the author 2017 reprints and permissions  sagepub.co.uk journalspermissions.nav doi 10.1177 2399808317719072 journals.sagepub.com home epbintroduction urbanization is one of the most striking global changes currently. according to united nations estimates, two thirds of the population worldwide will be living in cities by theyear 2050 . some urban problems related to ongoing urbanization such as urban sprawl are associated more with the physical structure of cities, while others, such as spatial segregation of households according to income, are related to social andeconomic conditions. due to undesired e ects from these two urban problems on citydevelopment, city planners aim to eliminate problems such as sprawl and segregation inthe city . these two issues, urban sprawl and income segregation, are alsoconsidered to be inter related. for example, pendall and carruthers stated that afundamental goal of many smart growth e orts is to promote greater socioeconomic equitythrough more compact development. interestingly, from an empirical point of view, the interaction between these two phenomena is not clear the literature provides contradictory empirical ndings on how sprawl and segregation are related . these di ering ndings motivated us to further explore this relationship.
state of research in urban sprawl and income segregation urban sprawl has become a subject of particular interest among planners and policy makers.the simple view is that urban sprawl involves low density residential developments over a large area. the negative impacts of urban sprawl include a lack of scale economies, enlarged tra c volume, loss of open space and thus damage toecosystems . indicators todescribe urban sprawl include the total residential area and the population densitygradient, which describe the decline of the population density from the centre to theoutskirts.
income segregation is the uneven spatial distribution of income groups within a certain area. the negative impacts of income segregation include increased economic disadvantages of low income families when compared to high income families. for example, income segregation concentrates political power and in uence in a small number of local areas. the uneven distribution of collective goods, for instance,has more in uence on children than on adults because these groups spend more time inthe neighbourhood, and they need more crucial public amenities, such as schools, parks, andso on . comparing the income structure of each district in thecity with the overall income structure of the city is the most common approach to measureincome segregation. the neighbourhood sorting index and centile gap index are examples of these indicators.
empirical evidence suggests a positive relationship between income level and urban sprawl. from the view of urban economics, urban sizes are the result of orderly marketequilibrium and rising levels of income increase housing demand, which leads to a larger cityand hence urban sprawl . for instance, brueckner and fansler found a positive contribution of mean income to urban area in 40 us urbanized areasin the 1970s. margo suggested that as much as half of the increase in suburbanizationbetween 1950 and 1980 can be explained by rising incomes. bhatta et al. concluded that the expansion of the economic base encourages urban sprawl. additionally, theoretical considerations based on the model suggested by alonso and later expanded by muth and mills concerned with urban land useand market land prices con rm this relationship. modelling shows that market processeslead to increasing city size with rising income levels, where each household takes its housing2 environment and planning b urban analytics and city science 0location, rent, transport cost and composite good into account and maximizes its utility .
the relationship between income inequality and income segregation has also received scienti c attention. tiebout provided a possible theoretical explanation for the contribution of income distribution to income segregation as inequality increases, rich and poor households are less likely to have the same willingness to pay for a given set ofneighbourhood amenities . three recent studies provided empirical evidencethat increasing inequality contributes to increasing income segregation. watson analysed the change in income inequality and segregation between 1970 and 2000 for 216metropolitan areas in the us and found that an increase in inequality by one standarddeviation drove up income segregation by 0.4 to 0.9 standard deviations. reardon andbischo estimated that, over a 30 year period, growing inequality accounted for approximately 60 of the increase in income segregation across the 100 largest metro areas in the us. scarpa con rmed the same cause of increasing segregation basedon data for malmo , sweden. the studies based on us cities found that the connection between rising inequality and increasing income segregation is largely driven by the factthat families at the top of the income distribution are geographically separating themselvesas they become more a uent.
interestingly, however, there is minimal literature directly relating income segregation and urban sprawl. moreover, these studies report ambiguous empirical results. wheeler  stated that little evidence supports the idea that urban sprawl is systematically associated with greater income segregation in american metropolitan areas. jargowsky arguedthat sprawl and central city decline are both a manifestation of a metropolitan developmentprocess that leads to a higher level of economic segregation and provides empirical evidencefor us metropolitan areas. in contrast, glaeser and kahn stated that urban sprawlmay reduce income segregation in car based edge cities. they found a negative correlationbetween urban growth and level of income segregation in us cities. because of thesecontradictory ndings, we further investigate the relationship between income segregation and urban sprawl in the remainder of this paper.
overview of related agent based models  abm is a modelling method that considers preferences and behavioural rules of individual agents to explore the e ects of the interactions between agents within a particularenvironment over time . as a bottom up approach, abm has an advantageand is popular in urban residential mobility research. compared to other modelling methods that uniformly apply aggregated rules across system components, abms model individuals and their behaviours in a more direct way . due totheir ability to represent an individual s decision making process and interaction from thebottom up, abms have become popular in the eld of urban land use change simulation. constructing stylized models based on classical theories together withdata driven models and models combining theories and empirical ndings are commonapproaches for urban abm . the monocentricurban model of alonso with its assumption of a free market is one of the classical theories that is often applied in urban simulation . building upon alonso s basic assumptions about location choice, existing models following this approachcover land market dynamics , the e ect of spatial policies , or extensions to the monocentric model . the family ofsimulation models building on schelling s approach is based on di erent population groups and the e ects of preferences for living close to one s own group. spielman and harrison investigated the e ects ofthe built environment on segregation in such a framework and found a positive relationshipbetween sprawl and segregation. these classic model based abms belong to the family of stylized models following the keep it simple stupid approach rather than the  keep it descriptive stupid approach . we chose thekiss approach as it has the advantage of being simple and straight forward and alsothe potential to produce generalized results.
aim and organisation of the study in this study, we explore what the relationship between urban sprawl and income segregation.
to this end, we developed a stylized monocentric urban abm based on alonso s theory, which means that we do not include preferences regarding living close to speci c types ofagents as would be the case in the schelling framework. thus, all segregation patternsemerging in our model emerge from location choices solely due to prices and availability ofliving space. we describe this model in section model description . the indicators toevaluate model outputs are given in section output evaluation . the setup of oursimulation experiments is summarised in section simulation experiments , and section overview of simulation runs provides an overview of the simulation runs. to validate our stylized model, we used observed empirical patterns of a system, which is a suggested method for validating emergent phenomena . more speci cally, we usepositive correlations between income level and urban sprawl as well as between income inequality and income segregation to validate our model. section the relationship between sprawl and income segregation provides the results for our mainresearch question, namely the relationship between urban sprawl and income segregation, andthe results of a sensitivity analysis are summarised in section sensitivity analysis . the results are discussed in section discussion , and conclusions are drawn in section conclusion .
methods model description overview.1in this model, agents represent households who use their income for housing , transportation and composite goods without saving. the income of households isgenerated randomly during initialization with di erent income and inequality levels. the city is represented in a spatially explicit way and follows a monocentric structure, as in alonso s model .during the course of a simulation, households re locate within the city to maximize theirutility . simple rules mimic market dynamic andadjust land rents according to supply and demand . theoverall schematic of the model is given in figure 1, and initialisation values are summarisedin section simulation experiments . time is modelled as discrete steps.
the city landscape. a2 5 c225 grid represents the arti cial urban landscape in the model. the centre is located in the middle patch. the arti cial city is divided into 25 districts . except for the central business district patch, allother patches provide 100 units of living area for households . in the monocentric4 environment and planning b urban analytics and city science 0figure 1. flowchart of the model.
figure 2. average income per patch in one exemplary simulation run for mean income 1200 and gini coefficient 0.3 .guo et al. 5model, all household activities, e.g. working, shopping, are assumed to take place in the cbd. households occupy a certain amount of the living area in the patch. there isno xed area building entity in the landscape. therefore, households can exibly takethe amount of living area as needed. in contrast to most other conceptual models following alonso, in this model a patch can accommodate more than one household.
this allows for a variability of population density, both per patch and per district. therent of a patch changes in the simulation but is never lower than the initial rent .
initialization of household income. we applied a generalized beta distribution, which is widely used as a distribution of income , to initialize householdincome. we varied the level of income and inequality for di erent simulations. the income of one household in a single simulation is constant.
households decision making. following alonso s model, the households face a trade o  between living area, location and composite goods. the composite goods can be seen asthe income remaining after rent and transportation costs, which is assumed to be spent in away that directly creates utility for the household. we use a utility function based on acobb douglas function for composite goods and living area to realize this trade o   . it is constrained by the income of the households, which is spent on housing , transportation and composite goods at each time step . the transportation cost is calculated by the distance to cbd times the travelcost per distance unit, which is constant throughout the simulation. the preference ofhouseholds regarding income spent on the living area or composite goods is controlled bythe weight in equation . because that preference is not the focal point of this study, we setit to 0.5 as an unweighted default.
utility composite goods  c11 c2living area c12,with c11 c12 1 1  income living area c2rent distance to cbd c2transport cost perunit composite goods  2  at the initial stage, households are not located anywhere. the aim of households in the simulation is to nd a location to maximize their utility. households make decisions andmove based on the order of their income from high to low at each time step, re ecting abetter access to the housing market, and higher probability of success to obtain housing of more wealthy people. in each step, households search only 10 random locations to represent the limited time and resource that one has in the search process. households calculate theirpotential utility for each candidate location. households can take a exible amount of livingarea depending on their demand. the optimum living area is the area that thehousehold should take from a speci c patch to have the highest utility in the candidatepatch . if there is not enough area in the candidate patch for the ola, thehousehold will consider taking all the area that is still available in the patch , which provides them the highest utility in that patch in the current occupancy situation . we de ned a minimum living unit for a household in the model to prevent a household settling on an unrealistic small living area . householdscompare the potential utilities in candidate locations and their current location and makedecisions either to relocate to the new location or to stay at the current location. after allhouseholds nish their decisions and movements, the rent of the patch will be updated by a6 environment and planning b urban analytics and city science 0simple rule explained in section update of land rents , and the household s current utility will be adjusted accordingly.
ola 1 c0 c11 c2income c0transport cost per unit c3distance to cbd rent 3  living area ola ,ola c20ala ala ,ola4ala c26  4  in all consecutive time steps, the residential mobility decision of households follows a two step approach . this means that the households rst evaluatethe stress of moving and then start their search and relocation process. the stress stems fromthe individual evaluation of the current utility and income, which we call satisfaction leveland is compared to the rest of the city. it is calculated as the ratio of the di erence of theircurrent utility and income and the di erence between the minimum utility and income in thecity . compared to simply calculating the ratio of utility and income, this approach also accounts for the overall range of satisfaction levels in the city and depicts a higher sensitivity of satisfaction at the lower end of the income spectrum, which aims tore ect the often more urgently required change of housing for such households. thehouseholds compare their individual satisfaction level with the overall satisfaction level inthe city . the idea behind this comparison is to measure whether householdsacquire proper utility based on their income. if a household s individual level is lower thanthe average, the household does not optimally use its income. therefore, the household isunder stress and starts searching for a new location to maximize its satisfaction level.
individual satisfaction level  individual utility c0minimum utility of households individual income c0minimum income of households 5  overall satisfaction level median utility of households c0minimum utlity of households median income of households c0minimum income of households  6  as a consequence, households do not compete d irectly in the sense of bidding for speci c patches or ola. however, as the rent changes based on the occupation rate of the patch and its surrounding patches, households compete indirect ly, as they can spend di erent units of income.
update of land rents. a series of simple rules mimics the market dynamics and the basic relationship between supply and demand. the rent of a patch is in uenced by its own andtable 1. default values in the model.
variable name value number of households 500 preference to other goods 0.5 preference to area c12 0.5 living units per patch 100 minimum living unit for a household 10 transport costs per unit 10initial and minimum rent per living unit 10guo et al. 7its moore neighbourhood patches occupancy rates, which are summarized in the rent index  . the rent of the patch changes according to the value of the rent index of thepatch. if a patch and its neighbouring patches have a high occupancy rate, the rent index ofthis patch will be high. in this case, we assume that this patch is desirable among households, and the rent of this patch will increase in the next step. when the rent index of a patch is larger than 0.9, the rent of this patch will increase by 10 . when the rent index is smallerthan 0.5, the rent will decrease by 10 . these values are chosen to allow the model to behave in line with basicmarket mechanisms.
rent index 0 3 c2 occupied area in neighborhood total area in neighborhood 0 7 c2occupied area in the patch total area in the patch 7  rent of patch t 1 110 c3rent per living unit t ,rent index 40 9 rent per living unit t ,0 5 c20rent index c200 9 90 c3rent per living unit t ,rent index 50 58    8  in equation , t represents a time step.
output evaluation urban sprawl urban sprawl as an emergent property of the system is measured using two indicators, namely residential area and the population density gradient. these two indicators could respectivelyindicate urban sprawl from the physical structure and the socio economic aspect.
residential area. the residential area is the most direct indicator of urban sprawl. a high value of residential area indicates serious urban sprawl. because we do not change total population number in the simulation, the residential area is also equivalent to the net density, which is calculated by the population divided by the residential area.
population density gradient. the other common indicator of urban sprawl in the literature is the population density gradient . it describes the spatialdistribution of the population within an urban area, often with a population densitydecreases from the city centre to the outer regions. the most commonly used model todescribe the density gradient is the negative exponential function  introduced by clark . gradient values are commonly calculated by tting a linear model of the logarithm of density against distance to the cbd using ordinary least squarestechniques .
population density distance to cbd ae  c0b c2distance to cbd 9  where ais the hypothetical density in the city centre, and bis the density gradient.
income segregation. income segregation needs to be measured along a continuous dimension for income. therefore, indicators for racial segregation, such as the index of dissimilarity,cannot be applied simply . there are some indicators speci cally designed tomeasure the income segregation. here, the outputs of our abm are evaluated using theneighbourhood sorting index and the centile gap index .8 environment and planning b urban analytics and city science 0by applying both indicators, we are able to compare the results to previous ndings and estimate each indicator s usability.
neighbourhood sorting index . the neighbourhood sorting index , a measure of overall income segregation across districts, was developed by jargowsky . the nsi is the ratio of the square root of the between district income variance to the totalincome variance . jargowsky mentioned that the method implicitly controls for both the overall income level because it is based on deviations from the meanhousehold income, and overall income inequality, since it is expressed as a percentage oftotal income variance . a limitation of the nsi in regard to empirical data is that it requires estimating the total variance of income in a city, which is generally not available.nsi ranges from 0 to 1, where 0 means perfect integration and 1 means perfect segregation.
nsi   c27n  c27h pn n 1hn c2income n c0income 2 hr  ph i 1income i c0income 2 hr 10  where iis the household s index, nis the index of neighbourhood, hnis the number of households in neighborhood n, and hand nare the total number of households and neighbourhoods, respectively.
centile gap index . the centile gap index was developed by watson and is based on the spatial distribution of households by income percentile. it represents thedeviation of average income from the median for each district compared to that whichwould be achieved under perfect integration. under perfect integration, the cgi equals 0.in contrast, a completely segregated city would consist of homogenous neighbourhoods,which would lead to a cgi of 1. similarly to the nsi, the cgi is not related to the shape of the income distribution.
cgi 0 25 c0 1 hx ipi c0pmedti jj c30 0 25 11  where iis the household s index, his the number of households in the metropolitan area, pi is the estimated percentile in the metropolitan area m of the income distribution of household i, and pmedti is the estimated income percentile of median households in the tract of household i.
simulation experiments we varied income level and income inequality in 275 simulations. these simulations include combinations of di erent mean income and thegini coe cient with ve replicas for eachcombination. the range of the gini coe cient here represents the range found in empirical studies. the lower boundary of the hypothetical income was set to 700 to avoid societies without a middle class for a high inequality level and low meanincome . the upper boundary of 1700 was set because higher mean incomes alwayslead to the pattern that all households occupy an individual patch. each simulation was runfor 500 households. we chose the number of households because of the balance ofguo et al. 9computation time and meaningful outputs. a city with too many households in the arti cial city model will often have the pattern that households occupied all the patches under manycircumstances. this e ect will blur the e ect of income to urban form patterns.
to investigate the sensitivity of the model to parameters settings including city size, we conducted a sensitivity analysis .
first, we tested simulations with proportionally increased population and the size of thelandscape. we expanded the length of landscape in the model by factor of 1.3, 1.8 and 2.2.therefore, the same analysis was done for cities with 1.96, 3.24 and 4.84 times the size as theoriginal model. furthermore, we conducted an extensive sensitivity analysis for theparameters preference to other goods, transport cost per unit and initial and minimumrent per living unit.
results overview of simulation runs our results show that after 50 time steps, households rarely relocated anymore so that equilibrium was reached. to be on the safe side, we report simulation results after 100time steps. the overall patterns from the simulations were calculated by four indicators.we used residential area and density gradient to measure the urban sprawl, and nsi andcgi to measure the income segregation. the indicators range over all simulations and the indicators coe cient of variation from each simulation replication are shown in table 2.
the small values for the mean of the coe cient of variation indicate that results fromdi erent simulations in the same income structure are similar.
figure 3 shows strong correlations between the two indicators for urban sprawl as well as the two for income segregation. spearman s rank correlation between residential areaand density gradient is r s c00.94 and r s 0.79 between the cgi and the nsi.
validation 1 income level and sprawl we aimed to analyse whether the empirical nding of a positive correlation between incomelevel and urban sprawl can be reproduced in the model. the results of simulations withvarying mean income and income inequalities clearly indicate that mean incomehas a strong e ect on both indicators of urban sprawl. the correlation coe cient betweenmean income and density gradient is r s c00.82 , while the correlation coe cient between mean income and residential area is r s 0.86 . interestingly, figure 4 also shows that higher income inequality is related to higher density gradients and less residential area, indicating lower sprawl levels. the correlation coe cients table 2. indicator range and coefficient of variation.
indicators min maxmean of coefficient of variation residential area 183 500 0.02 density gradient 0.01 0.50 0.11 nsi 0.16 0.64 0.10cgi 0.03 0.42 0.1110 environment and planning b urban analytics and city science 0between the gini coe cient of income and urban sprawl indicators are r s 0.51 and r s c00.42 , respectively.
validation 2 income inequality and income segregation the second empirical nding we analysed to validate the model is whether income inequality is positively correlated with income segregation. to test this correlation in the model,we examined the e ect of income inequality on incomesegregation at di erent income levels.
the relationship between the gini coe cient and the two segregation indicators is shown in figure 5. the correlation coe cient between the gini coe cient of incomeand the segregation indicators is r s 0.43 and 0.64 , respectively. the income segregation at a very high income inequality level may be lower than for a smalle r gini coe cient . the variability between replicates of income segregation at very high income inequality is also large.
there is an interesting but not very obvious negative correlation between income level and income segregation. the correlation coe cient between mean income and the nsi is figure 3. relationship among urban sprawl indicators and segregation indicators .
figure 4. relationship between mean income and density gradient and residential area .guo et al. 11rs c00.41 , while the correlation coe cient between mean income and the cgi is rs c00.19 .
the relationship between sprawl and income segregation to answer our research question, what is the relationship between urban sprawl and income segregation , we analysed simulations with all combinations of ve levels ofincome inequality and 11 levels of mean income. figure 6 shows thatboth segregation indicators are positively correlated with the density gradient and negatively correlated with residential area, indicating that high levels of segregation are associated with low urban sprawl and vice versa. the correlation coe cients among thefour indicators are given in table 3. furthermore, figure 6 shows that no simulationsproduce results that fall into the range of the lowest 10 of values for both types of indicators, avoiding both sprawl and segregationat the same time . we also calculated the correlation coe cientsbetween indicators on the three increased scales. the correlation coe cients are very close towhat we present here.
sensitivity analysis furthermore, a sensitivity analysis was conducted to investigate whether these patterns alsohold for other parameter settings. detailed results are given in the supplementary material s2.
figure 5. relationship between gini s coefficient and income segregation indicators.
table 3. spearman s rank correlation coefficients between urban sprawl and segregation indicators. all coefficients are significant.
density gradient residential area nsi 0.56 c00.42 cgi 0.46 c00.3512 environment and planning b urban analytics and city science 0in a nutshell, the sensitivity analyses show that the size of the city, the preference for other goods, the transport costs as well as initial minimum rent per living unit have e ects on the investigated patterns. once we narrowed down the parameter space to exclude implausiblesimulation setups , we found qualitatively similar positive relationshipsfor income level and sprawl and income inequality and segregation . for our research question on the relationship of urban sprawl and income segregation, wealso found consistent negative correlations in this parameter space.
discussion usability of indicators in this study, we used two indicators each to quantify urban sprawl and income segregation.
urban sprawl was measured by total residential area and the density gradient of population figure 6. relationship between urban sprawl indicators and income segregation indicators . t op left density gradient cgi top right residential area cgi  bottom left density gradient nsi top right residential area nsi. the grey areas encompass the smallest 10 of values , indicating a potentially preferable non sprawl and non segregation situation.guo et al. 13density, which were shown to reveal di erent aspects of the urban form, namely the physical and the socio economic urban form, in empirical studies, e.g. for europe .however, our results show that these two urban sprawl indicators are so strongly correlatedthat they were exchangeable in the context of this model. the high correlation between the two sprawl indicator results is mainly due to the xed population and city area in the model, which lead to the same gross population density in the city. the correlation betweenresidential area and density gradient would be weaker if the model complexity increasedby varying landscape size and population. nevertheless, considering comparability to ndings from empirical studies and possible future work, whether empirical or theoretical,we report both urban sprawl indicators to quantify the model results.
we also used two indicators to measure the residential income segregation level, namely the nsi, which is widely used, and the cgi, which is supposed to overcome the high data demand of the nsi. overall, we found a high correlation between the two indicators, but with considerable variation between the two for high cgi and nsi values . in empirical studies, the range of segregation levels is small 0.3 0.5 for nsi and 0.1 0.2 for cgi . our results show that forthis range, the correlation between the two is very good. the cgi has the advantage ofrequiring no assumptions about the income distribution because the distribution of income isnormally unknown in reality. however, in this modelling study, we have perfect informationon household income, so the nsi has the advantage of easier implementation and less calculation time.
pattern validation the empirical ndings from the literature and our model ndings about the relationship between urban sprawl and mean income as well as between income inequality andsegregation are conceptually summarized in figure 7.
figure 7. a conceptual diagram representing modelling results of this paper and the empirical results found in the literature.14 environment and planning b urban analytics and city science 0the positive correlation between urban sprawl and mean income is clearly demonstrated in figure 4 and is supported by previous empirical work .when the income level is high, households have more income to spend on transportation and they are able to a ord a greater living area. therefore, the city expands when the overall income level increases. our model results also con rm the positive correlation between income inequality and segregation . the results matchthe empirical ndings from watson and reardon and bischo . in the model,the districts far away from the city centre have a higher mean income than the districts closeto the city centre. the fact that the model was able to simulate both empirical patterns raisedour con dence in model performance when further elaborating on the relationship betweenurban sprawl and income segregation. it is worthwhile note that the segregation pattern is anemergent pattern from the model without explicit rules for segregation, e.g. the tolerant rate or di erent qualities of amenities. the segregation pattern would most likely be even clearer if we accounted for the preference for the speci c environment andneighbourhood characteristics in the model.
interestingly, we also see relatively lower income segregation at a gini coe cient of 0.5 than 0.4 in the model. the likely reason for this pattern isthe large economic advantage the relatively rich households have in a very unequal situation.the a ordability of transportation and utility derived from a large living area leads to manyrelatively rich households choosing to live in the city outskirts. this is the major reason for income segregation in the model. however, in a model scenario with very high inequality , relatively rich households have so many economic advantages that some of them can even choose to live close to the city centre with large living areas, eventhough the rent close to the city is relatively high, which can be observed in the model andreality. another potential explanation may be the distribution of income behind the highgini coe cient in this case, the vast majority of households have very low incomes, whileonly very few are very rich. distributing these households into the landscape might lead to adrop in the nsi again.
the relationship between urban sprawl and segregation the relationship between urban sprawl and income segregation has rarely been investigatedin empirical studies. scholars have presented di erent results regarding the relationshipbetween these two undesired phenomena in urban development. for example, wheeler found that they are not related, jargowsky stated that urban sprawl has apositive e ect on urban segregation while glaeser and kahn found a negative e ect.
finally, the modelling study within the schelling framework by spielman and harrison  also found a positive e ect. thus, our main interest in this modelling study is toshed light on this disputed issue. the model results show that the two phenomena arenegatively correlated, which means that more urban sprawl is associated with less incomesegregation . this contradicts those results from the studies mentioned above thatfound either a positive or no relationship .
the interactions between mean income and segregation as well as income inequality and urban sprawl explain the negative correlation. first, high income inequality has a negative e ect on urban sprawl. this pattern can be explained by the assumptions made in the alonso, muth, and mills model. the high gini coe cient with a xed mean income anda right skewed distribution means that there are a large number of households with incomelower than the mean income. this condition is similar to the case with a low mean incomebut more equality. therefore, these comparably poor households, which are the majority inguo et al. 15the city, are restricted to living closer to the centre to avoid high transportation costs, meaning that this city is more compact than a city with the same mean income but alower gini coe cient. second, the income level also has a negative e ect on incomesegregation. one explanation is that when the mean income is high in the model city, the comparably poor households also have the ability to live in the city outskirts in small living units. this is not achievable for the comparably poor households in a society with lowermean income in the model. therefore, in the simulation results, the higher potential formobility leads to a negative correlation of income level and segregation. thus, urban sprawland segregation respond inversely to changes in both income level and distribution. thesetwo reasons lead to the observed negative correlation between sprawl and segregation.glaeser and kahn argue that sprawling cities are normally car oriented and areless segregated compared to compact cities with multiple transport modes. in a city with multiple transport modes, the rich will live in the car zones while the poor prefer to live close to public transport. therefore, compared to compact cities, sprawling cities have lesssegregation. contrary to our ndings here, spielman and harrison found apositive relationship between urban sprawl and segregation within a schelling framework.in their simulation experiments, the built environment is a property of the landscape and isvaried when initialising the simulation experiments. the agents in the model only havepreferences to live close to speci c other population groups, and the simulations showthat these preferences can be realised more e ectively within a larger space. in our approach, both the built environment and segregation are emergent properties of the system, as the agents consider costs and available living units in their location choice.due to the processes of price formation and occupation of living units summarised above,contradictory ndings emerge when using market oriented versus neighbourhood similarityassumptions for the location choice.
figure 6 shows that no simulation runs within the alonso framework ended within a range that has small values for all of the indicators ofurban sprawl and income segregation, at the same time . we conclude from this result that, under the free market conditions implemented in our model, the optimal outcome for urban planners, namely low levels ofurban sprawl and income segregation, is not likely to happen. examining figure 6 moreclosely, we can see that in a poor and equal society , the goal oflittle sprawl and weak income segregation is more likely to be achieved. however, that wouldnot maximize overall welfare. to conclude, avoiding urban sprawl and income segregationin a city might indeed be a wicked problem , and solutions to this problem should be tested systematically. mechanistic models, such as the one we present here considering possible extensions, appear to o er a good potential to further deepen our knowledge of the complex interplay of processes governing complex systemslike urban areas.
limitations and future research as mentioned in the previous sections, the city model presented here is a stylized one and doesnot on top of policy instruments such as planning consider physical properties of the landscape, such as rivers and hills, among others. furthermore, we did not capture di erent transport choices in the model and believe that further di erentiation of transport modeswould further enrich the explanatory power of the model. while the monocentric structureis a clear simpli cation of a real city, we considered it a good starting point for our study,exploring basic patterns and principles of population distribution. also, our stylized approach16 environment and planning b urban analytics and city science 0assumes that a housing market exists and that oor space and transportation are the most important factors in residential mobility. we believe that next to north america, this alsoholds for many european cities, for example. another di erence between the above mentioned empirical studies and the model is that the data in empirical studies consist of time series with changes of population size. in this model, we chose to simulate di erent combinations of income level and income distribution with xed population numbers tominimize the complexity of the model and the set of simulations. the rent developmentmechanism described in section update of land rents applies a simple approach to mimicmarket dynamics. a more sophisticated market model will not only increase credibility of themodel, but might also in uence sprawl and segregation ,so that it is worthwhile to further develop the model in this respect. however, the resultsindicate that the model stemming from urban theory can explain the emergence of empirical patterns. this in turn demonstrates that a virtual city in a simulation model can be used to explore urban theory and thus understand patterns in the real world.
the model results show that the desired urban development with low urban sprawl and low income segregation does not happen in the virtual city under free market conditionswithout any interventions such as urban planning measures. thus, the model indicates thevalue of urban planning. in future studies, it would be interesting to systematicallyinvestigate which planning polices could foster thedevelopment of less sprawl and less segregation within the model.
there are some aspects of the model that have not been explored in this study. for example, the preferences for living area and composite goods in the current model are homogeneous.inputting preferences related to income level may yield di erent outcomes of the modi edmodel. following schelling s approach, the preference for neighbours with similar incomescould be another feature of the model, which could help to further understand the mechanismof segregation. by systematically exploring the additional e ects of preferences towardsspeci c income groups, one could more closely investigate the di erent ndings regardingurban sprawl and segregation found within the alonso and the schelling framework . moreover, the population number and income distribution of the city is stable in this study. with changes in population number, we couldsimulate the growing and shrinking context of a city, which could improve our understandingof urban form development in cities facing the challenge of change. changing the landscape ofa city, for example, di erent size or setting of geographically heterogeneous landscape could also advance our understanding of urban sprawl and segregation. also, thespatial distribution of activities within a city is important. implementing di erent centreswould require various new assumptions however, it would be interesting to see with which model assumptions empirical patterns of real, more complex cities could be explained. such investigations would, however, clearly exceed the focus of our study. finally, neighbourhoode ects also play an important role in reality. in this study, we did not include this on purposeto focus on the relationship between income structure, urban sprawl and income segregation.however, we see the potential of adding this in following studies, for gaining more detailedinsights about the e ects of social aspects on spatial urban patterns.
conclusion urban sprawl and income segregation are two major urban problems in urban development.both urban spatial patterns are discussed with respect to income level and incomedistribution, but are hardly ever analysed together empirically. empirical studies eitherfound very little evidence for a relationship between sprawl and segregationguo et al. 17 or a positive relationship . to better understand this relationship, we developed a stylized abm to study this aspect in a virtual laboratory.we utilized alonso s bid rent theory to model the location choice of households in anunregulated market. we did not specify the explicit rules for segregation in the model.
the model provided an emergent pattern of urban sprawl as well as income segregation.
we quanti ed urban sprawl with the total residential area from the physical structureperspective and the population density gradient from a socio economic perspective. wequanti ed segregation of income groups with the two indicators, nsi and cgi, whichdi er regarding their need for data. the results show that the abm successfully replicatesthe ndings from empirical studies regarding the positive relationships between both incomelevel and urban sprawl and between income distribution and income segregation.interestingly, the results show a negative correlation between urban sprawl and income segregation, which contradicts other empirical studies.
in the virtual laboratory of our abm, we can shed some more light on the processes underlying these patterns. in the model, households maximize their utility by choosing theirlocation as well as the size of the living area. in general, relatively rich households have atendency to move to the city outskirts and have a large living area. at the same time, therelatively poor households stay close to the centre to compensate their disadvantage inmobility. however, this tendency does not apply to all the cases in the model. for example,in a richer society, the relatively poor households have fewer disadvantages in mobility than in a poorer society, which leads to income level having a positive correlation with urban sprawl as well as a negative correlation with income segregation. at the same time, the incomeinequality has a positive e ect on income segregation but a negative correlation with urbansprawl. the combined e ects of the negative correlation lead to a wicked problem, i.e. in thesimulation we do not create a society with low urban sprawl and low income segregation,which is a state that planners normally wish to achieve. this nding strongly emphasizes theneed for planning and unravels some aspects of free market failure.
this abm has shown that in an unregulated market, urban sprawl and income segregation are negatively related, contradicting the scarce empirical results currently available. sound evidence is needed to provide a base for e cient policy instruments thatcan tackle the complexity of urban sprawl and income segregation. therefore, this modellingstudy should be a motivation for both more detailed empirical research to test theirrelationship empirically in a much broader setting and for further theoretical modellingstudies. moreover, policy implementations, such as zoning or social housing, and theire ects should be another focal point of future empirical and modelling studies.
acknowledgements the authors gratefully acknowledge the very constructive comments of two anonymous reviewers.
declaration of conflicting interests the author declared no potential con icts of interest with respect to the research, authorship, and or publication of this article.
funding the author disclosed receipt of the following nancial support for the research, authorship, and orpublication of this article all of the authors acknowledge nancial support from the german ministry18 environment and planning b urban analytics and city science 0for education and research for the project gemeinsam auf dem weg in die energiee ziente urbane moderne einrichtung eines akteursorientierten energiemanagementsystems in delitzsch .
note 1. the model is provided at openabm . a detailed model description according to the odd protocol is provided in supplementary material s1.
references