this article was downloaded by tulane university  on 10 october 2014, at 19 24 publisher routledge informa ltd registered in england and wales registered number 1072954 registered office mortimer house, 37 41 mortimer street, london w1t 3jh, uk housing studies publication details, including instructions for authors and subscription information  http www.tandfonline.com loi chos20 residential attainment of now adult gautreaux children do they gain, hold or lose ground in neighborhood ethnic and economic segregation  micere keels a a university of chicago, comparative human development , chicago, usa published online 11 aug 2008.
to cite this article micere keels residential attainment of now adult gautreaux children do they gain, hold or lose ground in neighborhood ethnic and economic segregation , housing studies, 23 4, 541 564, doi 10.1080 02673030802101658 to link to this article http dx.doi.org 10.1080 02673030802101658 please scroll down for article taylor francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all the information contained in the publications on our platform. however, taylor francis, our agents, and our licensors make no representations or warranties whatsoever as to the accuracy, completeness, or suitability for any purpose of the content. any opinions and views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of the authors, and are not the views of or endorsed by taylor francis. the accuracy of the content should not be relied upon and should be independently verified with primary sources of information. taylor and francis shall not be liable for any losses, actions, claims, proceedings, demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with, in relation to or arising out of the use of the content.
this article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. any substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub licensing, systematic supply, or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden. terms conditions of access and use can be found at http  www.tandfonline.com page terms and conditionsresidential attainment of now adult gautreaux children do they gain, holdor lose ground in neighborhood ethnic and economic segregation  micere keels university of chicago, comparative human development, chicago, usa  abstract this paper examines the extent to which chicago s gautreaux residential mobility program affected children s residential attainment. low income black families voluntarily relocatedinto mostly white or mostly black city and suburban neighborhoods. the paper integrates quantitative and qualitative data collected eight to 22 years after participants initial move into their placement neighborhoods. the primary programmatic goal of desegregation was accomplished now adult children s origin, placement and current neighborhoods average 85.6, 29.9 and 44.5 percent black residents respectively. now adult children s residential mobility decisions have located them, on average, in ethnically integrated, low poverty neighborhoods children placed in mostly black, high poverty neighborhoods and those placed in mostly white, low poverty neighborhoodshave relocated to ethnically balanced low to moderate poverty neighborhoods. suburbanplacement was key in determining the level of children s initial relocation and current neighborhood quality. now adult children currently residing in suburban cities live in higher quality neighborhoods compared to those currently residing in chicago.
k eywords housing policy, residential mobility, gautreaux introduction the gautreaux residential mobility program enabled low income black families living in chicago s public housing developments, or on the waiting list for public housing, to moveto mostly white neighborhoods throughout the six county chicago and suburban area.because the gautreaux program was a desegregation remedy, participating families had tobe willing to move to census tracts with 30 per cent or fewer black residents. between 1976 and 1998, the leadership council for metropolitan open communities relocated more than 7000 families.
1the gautreaux program gave participating families rent issn 0267 3037 print 1466 1810 online 08 040541 24 q2008 taylor francis doi 10.1080 02673030802101658correspondence address micere keels, university of chicago, comparative human development, 5730 s.
woodlawn ave, chicago, 60637, usa. email micere uchicago.eduhousing studies, vol. 23, no. 4, 541 564, july 2008 downloaded by tulane university at 19 24 10 october 2014  subsidies that allowed them to live in suburban or city apartments for the same cost as public housing, but did not provide employment, transportation, child care or any otherassistance.
what are the likely outcomes for the children of these families many of these children were preschoolers when their parents relocated, and as such have had a chance to spend thebulk of their childhoods with very limited exposure to segregated, poor, high crime, innercity neighborhoods. the ndings presented in this paper extend the work of keels et al.
, which focused on the long term residential attainment of the mothers of gautreauxfamilies. did moving to better neighborhoods via the gautreaux program create long termimprovements in the communities in which the children of participating families live to study this, quantitative and qualitative methods were integrated utilizing administrativeand census data on the characteristics of children s current neighborhoods, and qualitativedata gathered in 2002 and 2003 from in depth follow up interviews with the mothers of 25families that participated in the gautreaux program. integrating these methods made it possible to accurately describe children s residential outcomes, examine participants  experiences of their placement communities, and get at the processes underlying whetherinitial gains in neighborhood quality were maintained.
approximately half of gautreaux program participants moved to neighborhoods within chicago, the other half moved to suburban communities. initial placement neighborhoodsvaried greatly in terms of ethnic composition and socio economic resources. when thecourt ruling was nalized in 1981, it included a provision to allow up to one third ofparticipants to move to census tracts with more than 30 per cent black residents.
2 therefore, despite the program s desegregation goal, a signi cant proportion of gautreauxparticipants was placed in mostly black, low income neighborhoods. at the other end ofthe spectrum, signi cant numbers moved to mostly white, middle and higher incomeneighborhoods. the study exploits thes e variations in placement neighborhood characteristics to assess the relationship between the characteristics of children s initialplacement neighborhoods and their long term residential outcomes. by using censusinformation about the characteristics of now adult gautreaux children s current neighborhoods , it is possible to gauge the extent to which the dramatic short run improvements in neighborhood minority segregation and socioeconomic status were maintained an average of 14 years after children relocated totheir placement addresses.
studies of residential mobility suggest that residential outcomes are determined by a multitude of household and metropolitan factors . for example, the decision to move is affected by life cycle changes suchas job loss or promotion, marriage or divorce, and the birth of a child or a child leavinghome. additionally, metropolitan factors, such as the affordability of alternative dwellings and the accessibility of transportation, can also trigger a move. the follow up interviews with gautreaux participants revealed that all of these factors affected now adult children,and triggered voluntary and involuntary moves in the years after moving to theirplacement address .
because the focus of this paper is on the outcomes of now adult children s residential mobility decisions, the effects of neighborhood change over time are unobserved.although neighborhood change contributes to residential outcomes independent of anindividual s mobility decisions, this is not a detrimental omission because residential mobility rather than neighborhood change accounts for the majority of people s exit and542 m. keels downloaded by tulane university at 19 24 10 october 2014  entry into signi cantly different neighborhoods .
although a complete accounting of residential mobility is impossible with these data, thestudy documents the neighborhoods in which a representative sample of now adultgautreaux children currently reside and examines the association between placement andcurrent neighborhood characteristics. in doing so, it is tested whether mobility out of high poverty inner city neighborhoods can be maintained when children mature and establish independent residences. information gained from in depth interviews with mothers is used to aid in interpreting potential processes behind now adult children s long term residentialoutcomes.
the ndings presented in this paper broaden our understanding of mobility based deconcentration programs in three ways. first, persistence of mobility out of mostly black,low poverty, inner city neighborhoods continues into the next generation as childrenmature and establish independent households. second, exposure to residence in highquality neighborhoods positively affects people s future residential decisions. third, suburban residence, on average, continues to be an important factor in determining neighborhood quality.
literature review residential attainment of black familieshigh levels of education and income are more important in determining residential attainment for blacks than for whites. however, even after controlling for groupdifferences in family composition and socio economic resources, black families remainless likely than white families to live in high quality neighborhoods . regardless of income and education, black families faceinstitutional and informal barriers when trying to gain access to residence in better neighborhoods . participation in the gautreaux program broke the link between children s disadvantaged status andneighborhood characteristics, and it is possible that as children matured their experiencesand information obtained from residing in particular placement neighborhoods may havehad lasting effects on their residential attainment.
why placement neighborhood characteristics might matter there are several aspects of children s placement neighborhoods that may affect the quality of the neighborhoods in which they currently reside. based on neighborhood resources, collective socialization and contagion epidemic models of neighborhood effects, placement in better neighborhoods and among better neighbors should be bene cial. it isalso important to consider the implications of competition and relative deprivation models,which focus on comparisons of self to others, and how this may negatively in uence low income individuals living in higher ses neighborhoods . gautreaux children s low social standing in af uent communities may bediscouraging, and reduce their likelihood of maintaining long term residence in higher ses neighborhoods. ethnicity based social distance may also affect children s integration into their placement neighborhoods and the characteristics of current neighborhoods. all elsesecond generation residential attainment 543 downloaded by tulane university at 19 24 10 october 2014  equal, black children moving to communities with higher percentages of black residents may adjust more easily and form stronger bonds with their new neighbors.
city versus suburban placement is also important because suburban locations resulted in a larger physical, cultural and resource disparity between children s origin and placementneighborhoods. in large metropolitan areas of the us, suburban communities arequalitatively different from demographically similar central city communities . suburban communities tend to have fewer poor families and few areas of concentrated poverty in central cities moderate and low poverty tracts may be bordered byhigh poverty tracts. furthermore, residence in the suburban ring is hypothesized to increasechildren s proximity to jobs and employment information which is likely to have a positiveeffect on now adult children s willingness and ability to maintain residence in high resourcecommunities .
effects of public housing relocation on neighborhood quality housing policy, with an eye on the larger goal of fostering self suf ciency, must assist families with adequate shelter in an adequate neighborhood. however, low income blackfamilies receiving housing assistance reside in some of the most caustic neighborhoods,which make their chances of self suf ciency less rather than more likely. there is greatpotential for families living in public housing developments to make substantial gains inneighborhood quality as public housing authorities increasingly move to voucher based assistance. in support of this, some researchers have found that project based housing assistance is more likely to produce racial and economic segregation compared tovoucher assistance coupled with housing counseling . however, others have found that relocation via housingvouchers does little to improve the neighborhood conditions in which former publichousing families live and raise their children . these researchers found that, in general, the majority of families leaving distressed public housing developments continue to be clustered in ethnically and socio economically segregated inner city neighborhoods.
the experimental moving to opportunity residential mobility demonstration program uses a carefully controlled experimental design to assess the effects of providingthe offer to move to low poverty communities . in comparison to thegautreaux program, mto s criterion for a qualifying neighborhood was based on class. partly as a result, mto families did not moveas far away from their original neighborhoods as did gautreaux s families . additionally, mto experimental families were allowed to choose their own units, whereas housing counselors assigned gautreaux families to units as they became available. finally, mto families, at enrollment, were much more disadvantaged thangautreaux families, partially due to the fact that mto families had longer generationalhistories of public housing residence, and unlike mto the gautreaux program includedparticipant screening .
3 the mto interim report presents an evaluation of treatment control differences four to seven years after baseline . mto s interim report showed that within four to seven years after their initial moves 66 per cent of experimental group families  have made subsequent moves and, on average, these subsequent moves were to higher poverty locations.544 m. keels downloaded by tulane university at 19 24 10 october 2014  however, even with these subsequent moves, experimental group families continue to reside in neighborhoods with lower poverty rates than the standard section 8 and controlgroups. however, since mto began placing families only in the mid 1990s, we will haveto wait for the 10 year follow up to determine whether mto enables families to residelong term in safer more af uent neighborhoods.
keels et al. present a detailed look at the long term residential outcomes of the mothers of families participating in the gautreaux program some eight to 22 years after their initial move via the program. almost all mothers participating in the gautreauxprogram have moved since placement, and all but a handful were able to escape long termfrom the ethnic and socio economic segregation of their inner city origin neighborhoods.furthermore, two thirds of those initially moving to the suburbs continued to live in thesuburbs. keels et al. conclude that helping low income families relocate into communities that are ethnically integrated, socio economically prosperous and less plagued by crimeappears bene cial in both the short and long run. however, there is considerable reason to doubt that the improvements in neighborhood quality experienced by gautreaux and mto experimental families would be maintained as children mature and establish independentresidences. the information presented in this paper on gautreaux children s residentialoutcomes, an average of 14 years after moving to their initial placement neighborhoods,provides a useful look at generational progress or regress. the data are now available tolook long term and examine whether improvements in neighborhood quality and mobilityout of inner city neighborhoods persisted into the second generation.
the gautreaux residential mobility program the data used in this research come from participants of the gautreaux residential mobility program who moved between 1977 and 1989. in 1966, dorothy gautreaux, a communityorganizer and activist, sued the chicago housing authority and the us department ofhousing and urban development in the nation s rst class action public housingdesegregation lawsuit. one of the desegregation remedies authorized by the supreme court was the gautreaux housing mobility program  for a more detailed description of the gautreaux program .
an important element of a program like gautreaux is take up the proportion of families offered housing that in fact took up the offer and moved.
4calculating take up rates for gautreaux is dif cult since the leadership council intentionally enrolled morefamilies than necessary to allow for attrition and the likelihood that larger families wouldhave dif culty nding a unit . the low take up rate of approximately 20 per cent primarily re ects the relatively few annually available certi cates and vouchers, and effective take up rate for the program may have been much higher .
5 votruba kling examined the relationships between the origin and placement neighborhood characteristics of gautreaux participants. they found that six of eightorigin neighborhood characteristics were signi cant predictors of the correspondingplacement neighborhood characteristics. this indicates that there is some degree of self selection by gautreaux participants into neighborhoods possessing characteristics theyprefer. however, votruba kling concluded that while gautreaux may not have been a quasi random experiment, it does appear to have induced a wide variation in neighborhood characteristics for participating families .second generation residential attainment 545 downloaded by tulane university at 19 24 10 october 2014  in general, gautreaux participants are demographically similar to public housing residents who were living in chicago during the years in which the program operated .6however, despite demographic similarities, gautreaux families clearly differ from other public housing families because they volunteered for the program.thus, these ndings generalize most readily to families voluntarily choosing to participate inresidential mobility programs in which, as with gautreaux, the nal decision to move to a more integrated and more af uent community is left up to the family. as the transformation of distressed public housing developments continues, families are often involuntarily moved tonew communities.
7involuntarily relocating families may not result in the same outcomes that are found for gautreaux participants.
quantitative data and methods information on program participants comes from gautreaux program records provided by the leadership council. a random half sample of all female headed families  who moved prior to 1990 was selected.8these program records provide origin and placement address, mother s date of birth, number of children and afdc receipt status attime of enrollment, and each child s birth date and gender. in total, 2668 children residedin 1348 families . this paper focuses on the 1077 childrenwho were aged 17 or younger when the move occurred, and aged 25 or older between 1995 and 2000. only children aged 25 or older at follow up are included to allow time for children to mature and begin establishing independent households. at follow up, only nineof 273 now adult children resided at the same address as their mother.
name, social security number and date of birth were needed to match participant records to administrative data sources. unfortunately, more than half of all children had missing orincomplete social security numbers in the paper les. this meant that only 447 of the 1077children could be included in these analyses. appendix 1 presents the demographic, originand placement neighborhood characteristics for the full sample and for those with and without social security numbers. based on logit regressions , year of move was the only factor signi cantly associated with whether children had complete socialsecurity number information. families moving later in the program s operation were morelikely to have provided children s social security number information, a result of theprogram s imposition of strict veri cation requirements in response to increasing demandfor the program. importantly, none of the origin or placement neighborhood censuscharacteristics were signi cantly associated with whether social security information wasmissing.
current addresses for eligible children were obtained from a credit reporting service and the illinois department of human services integrated client database records . the most recent address from these two sources wasused. now adult children are identi ed as having a current address if the address obtainedwas from 1995 or later. a post 1994 address was located for 343 of the 447 now adultchildren. however, 70 of these children were under age 25 when that address was lastupdated and therefore could not be included in these analyses. the analyses presented inthis paper focus on the residential outcomes of this nal sample of 273 now adult children.
eighty four per cent of these children continued to reside within illinois. the average year of current address is 1998, ranging from 1995 to 2000.546 m. keels downloaded by tulane university at 19 24 10 october 2014  to characterize origin and placement address census tract characteristics, the addresses were geocoded into census tracts and then matched to data from both the 1980 and 1990census, interpolated for year of relocation. the outcomes measure the long runneighborhood based success of now adult gautreaux children, obtained from census 2000data. three key census variables are used as proxies for origin, placement and currentneighborhood quality percentage of residents that are black, non elderly poverty rate, and percentage of adults with 16 or more years of education. neighborhood percentage black is used because the stated goal of the gautreaux program was to reduce minority racialsegregation. current neighborhood poverty and education level are used because severalresearchers have shown that these variables are associated with children s short and long term outcomes .
additionally, there is a relatively low correlation between placement neighborhood povertyand education level , particularly in comparison to the correlation between placement neighborhood poverty and percentage black .
qualitative data and methods to help interpret the quantitative results, interviews were conducted with 25 mothers of families who participated in the gautreaux program. because there is no control group ofparticipants that did not receive housing assistance, and there is a large time span betweennow adult children s placement and current addresses, it is important to obtain in depth information about participants experiences in the years since placement. information obtained from mothers interviews was critical in interpreting the quantitative data, andsuggesting potential processes behind children s residential outcomes.
9 to draw the sample, gautreaux program participants were categorized according to city versus suburban placement, and placement in a community that was greater than 75 per centblack versus a community that was less than 30 per cent black. a random sample ofinterviewees was selected from each of three placement categories suburbanneighborhood mostly black city neighborhood and mostly european american city neighborhood. current addresses for potential interviewees were located using a threestep process rst, internet phone book searches for the chicago and surrounding suburbanarea using participant s name second, us search person nder website using name, birthdate and last known address and nally a comprehensive search by staff at the nationalopinion research council using name, birth date and social security number.
the initial random selection resulted in 166 cases and letters were sent out to these participants. approximately 30 per cent of these letters were returned by the post of ce asundeliverable. thirty ve gautreaux participants responded and said that they were willing to be interviewed. only three potential respondents explicitly declined to participate. although the response rate was not high, the use of multiple search methodsmade it possible to interview mothers of families who represent the full range ofgautreaux participants.
10telephone interviews were also conducted with participants who were residing outside of illinois at the time of the interview. three of the womeninterviewed resided outside of illinois one was in the midwest and two were in southernstates. the wide range of participants interviewed decreases the potential bias that couldresult from interviewing only those that were the easiest to nd.
respondents had a varied history with regard to their experiences with public housing in chicago before enrolling in the gautreaux program. most respondents grew up in publicsecond generation residential attainment 547 downloaded by tulane university at 19 24 10 october 2014  housing and some even remembered a time when the developments were safe and had a strong sense of community. for three respondents, their rst experience with publichousing was during their early adulthood due to the birth of a child and the need for publichousing to make ends meet. five of the 25 respondents grew up in public housing but hadmoved out, into a private apartment or were doubled up with a friend or family for a fewyears before enrolling in the gautreaux program.
all but one of the mothers interviewed were rst generation chicagoans, on one or both sides of their families, whose parents moved from the south trying to make a better life for their families. respondents werebetween age 22 and 35 and had one to four children when they enrolled in the gautreauxprogram. twenty one of the 25 interviewees were receiving afdc when they enrolled inthe program. at the time of enrollment, the children of mothers interviewed ranged in agefrom 1 to 15. when follow up interviews were conducted in 2002 and 2003, these childrenwere between ages 13 and 31.
respondents placement neighborhoods were diverse. the average year of move was 1984, with all interviewees moving between 1977 and 1989. city movers were placed inneighborhoods that ranged from 99 per cent black, 40 per cent poor, and two miles fromthe origin address to neighborhoods that were 8 per cent black, 9 per cent poor, and eightmiles from the origin address. suburban movers were placed in neighborhoods that rangedfrom 18 per cent black, 5 per cent poor and 13 miles away from the origin address toneighborhoods that were 0.5 per cent black, 2 per cent poor and 27 miles from the originaddress. on average, interviewees remained at their placement address for seven years.
11 the placement neighborhoods of interviewees are representative of the full sample ofprogram participants whose origin, placement and current neighborhood characteristicsare detailed in keels et al. .
results the top half of table 1 presents the family and individual characteristics of gautreaux children. on average, children were 12.9 years old when they initially moved, had an average of 1.9 siblings, and approximately half were female. mothers were approximately33.4 years old and 73.6 per cent were receiving afdc at the time of the move. number ofsiblings and child s year of birth are the only demographic variables with signi cantdifferences between children placed in suburban versus city neighborhoods.
why families moved one theme throughout all of the interviews was that the decision to enroll in the gautreaux program had little to do with the desire to live next to white families, but was due to thedesire to raise their children in a better environment. integration was viewed as the meansto the objective, not as the objective itself. without much prompting, all gautreauxmothers stated that they participated in the program because they believed that it offeredtheir children a chance of a better life. these mothers simply wanted better for themselvesand their children. gautreaux families were also attempting to escape deplorable living conditions public housing developments were in disrepair, riddled with drugs and crime and were in an area of concentrated poverty. gautreaux mothers clearly recognized the548 m. keels downloaded by tulane university at 19 24 10 october 2014  table 1. mean and standard deviations of demographic and neighborhood measures variable full sample n 273 placed in city n 145 placed in suburb n 128plevel of city suburb difference demographic variables year of move 1984 1984 1984 0.313 mother s age at move 33.42 33.79 33.02 0.253mother received afdc at move 73.63 74.48 72.66 0.734 child year of birth 1971 1971 1971 0.023 child age at move 12.93 13.13 12.70 0.177number of siblings 1.90 1.74 2.07 0.033female 56.78 58.62 54.69 0.515 origin neighborhood variables per cent origin address was public housing53.70 53.79 53.91 0.985 per cent black 85.60 85.62 85.58 0.990 non elderly poverty rate 47.33 46.15 48.68 0.359 per cent adults with 16 years of school 8.27 7.52 9.12 0.277 placement neighborhood variables per cent black 29.94 50.33 6.47 0.000non elderly poverty rate 19.37 31.62 5.37 0.000per cent adults with 16 years of school 18.76 16.96 20.82 0.034 current neighborhood variables per cent black 44.48 49.63 38.60 0.022 non elderly poverty rate 17.85 18.91 16.63 0.233per cent adults with 16 years of school 23.71 25.85 21.27 0.054second generation residential attainment 549 downloaded by tulane university at 19 24 10 october 2014  threats of their origin inner city communities and believed that moving away from the physical, moral, and social dangers was critical.
origin and placement neighborhood characteristics approximately half of all children were living in a public housing development when their families enrolled in the program. origin neighborhoods averaged 85.6 per cent black and47.3 per cent poor residents, and 8.3 per cent of adults with a college degree . on average, gautreaux children moved with their families to placement neighborhoods that were less ethnically, socially and economically isolated than their origin neighborhoods. children of families placed within chicago moved to placementneighborhoods that averaged 50.3 per cent black, 31.6 per cent poor and 17.0 per cent ofadults with 16 or more years of schooling. in comparison, children of families placed in thesuburbs moved to placement neighborhoods that averaged 6.5 per cent black, 5.4 per centpoor and 20.8 per cent of adults with 16 or more years of schooling.
for the majority of participants, the gautreaux program was successful in meeting its court ordered goal of placing families in neighborhoods with 30 per cent or fewer black residents. nearly all children moving to the suburbs were placed in such neighborhoods.
in comparison, only about half of placements within chicago met this goal. chicagoplacements tended to follow a bimodal distribution, with 44 per cent placed in censustracts with 30 per cent or fewer black residents and 38 per cent placed in census tracts with95 per cent or more black residents.
among now adult children whose current neighborhoods were determined in 1995 or later, none resided in the same apartment or house into which they were initially placed.furthermore, as stated earlier, of the 273 now adult children only nine continued to reside at the same address as their mother. but where did they go if the majority moved back to neighborhoods like their original ones, the gautreaux program would have failed to meetits ambitious goal of permanently improving the neighborhood conditions in which thesenow adult children live and will raise the next generation.
current neighborhood ethnic composition neighborhood average percentage black increased substantially from placement to current addresses, but continued to be signi cantly less black than origin addresses. the proportionof black neighbors increased from an average of 29.9 per cent in placement neighborhoodsto an average of 44.5 per cent in now adult children s current neighborhoods. however, thisis substantially less black segregated than children s origin neighborhoods. it is also important to note that gautreaux children have, in moving from placement to current neighborhoods, moved to more ethnically balanced neighborhoods . childrenplaced in mostly black neighborhoods currently reside inneighborhoods that average 61.0 per cent black residents, compared to children placedin mostly white neighborhoods , who currently reside inneighborhoods that average 49.2 per cent black residents. the census tract racialcomposition for the average black individual in chicago and the surrounding suburbsprovides context for these ndings. in 1990, the average black individual in chicago resided in a neighborhood that was 78 per cent black, and in 2000 resided in a neighborhood that was 73 per cent black . in 1990, the average black individual550 m. keels downloaded by tulane university at 19 24 10 october 2014  in chicago s suburbs resided in a neighborhood that was 50 per cent black, and in 2000 resided in a neighborhood that was 51 per cent black .
figure 1 also includes the characteristics of mothers current neighborhoods to provide a simple comparison of children s to their mothers current neighborhoods a useful benchmark to gauge generational progress or regress. this comparison reveals that, on average, there has been virtually no generational regress both mothers and childrencurrently reside in ethnically integrated neighborhoods. because the interview protocoldid not include questions concerning the role of ethnic preferences in residential mobilitydecisions in the years since placement, it is dif cult to determine whether now adultchildren prefer the balanced ethnic composition of their current neighborhoods, orwhether they are residing in integrated neighborhoods because integrated low povertyneighborhoods are more affordable than mostly white low poverty neighborhoods.figure 1. now adult children and mother s placement and current neighborhood per cent blacksecond generation residential attainment 551 downloaded by tulane university at 19 24 10 october 2014  effects of gautreaux on residential preferences considering the nding that the majority of gautreaux children, both those placed in mostly black and mostly white neighborhoods, currently reside in ethnically balancedneighborhoods, it is important to examine the extent to which gautreaux mothers simplypreferred white neighbors, and passed this preference onto their children. based on theinterviews, gautreaux mothers did not prefer white neighbors, except to the extent thatthey believed that white neighborhoods would also be safer neighborhoods with betterschools and community resources. consistent with this, other researchers have found thatpeople use neighborhood racial composition as a signal for the current and future resource capacity of a neighborhood, in which fewer black residents is a signal for higher quality neighborhoods .
it was the safety of participants placement neighborhoods and the quality of the units that they were offered that was the deciding factor on whether to move and then stay attheir placement address. almost unanimously, the mothers plan when enrolling in theprogram was to live in the required neighborhood for one year and then move back closerto the communities that they were leaving. prior to the gautreaux program most participating families lived, since birth, in segregated neighborhoods in the inner city or on the south side of chicago. the schools, community centers and churches that theyattended were in segregated neighborhoods. these participants believed that they wouldnot be allowed to live in white neighborhoods and therefore were very reluctant to move.
bertha, who moved to a suburban location approximately 27 miles away from her public housing development, commented on the importance of the quality of the placement unit.she moved from a neighborhood that was 96 per cent black and 48 per cent poor to asuburban neighborhood that was 0 per cent black and 5 per cent poor.
the reason that i moved is because i needed a better place. i needed to understand what it was to get a better life, and i wasn t scared of a new horizon. although wheni moved, there were a lot of days when i said, i can t do it. but for the most part whatkept me focused was that beautiful apartment.
gautreaux families never received wholesale acceptance from their neighbors, but did establish one or two close friendships with neighbors of varying ethnic backgrounds. this is consistent with previous ndings that inner city public housing families moving to lower poverty neighborhoods receive enough acceptance from their new neighbors to feelcomfortable, but few form strong relationships with their new neighbors . gautreaux mothers new friendships were among other working class families, and involvedreciprocal sharing of household resources, child care and emotional support. theserelationships provided the support social capital necessary for participants to survive intheir new neighborhoods. mothers reported that their children had few problems making friends in the new community many stated that the children in their new neighborhoods were rarely unfriendly, even when their parents were not welcoming.
as stated earlier, respondents remained in their placement neighborhoods for an average of seven years, and this enabled children time to adjust and develop social relationships withtheir new peers. for children, early social interaction with other racial groups is important552 m. keels downloaded by tulane university at 19 24 10 october 2014  in shaping their ease and quality of interactions in interracial situations. studies of desegregation indicate that black children educated in desegregated schools have morewhite friends and are employed in more integrated workplaces .consistent with this, mothers reported that one of the bene ts of relocating to mostly whiteneighborhoods is that their children are comfortable interacting and working with whiteindividuals. this is re ected in the comments of the daughter of one respondent. darlene and her six children moved from a neighborhood that was 99 per cent black and 80 per cent poor to a suburban community that was 19 per cent black and 5 per cent poor.
 her daughter said. it s like you know we talk like this, but then you get around your environment, you talk different. like me, i guess i m coached on both sides, soi know when i m going to apply for a job, i m in a different environment, besides mycolor. oh i know how to talk just like you all know how to talk. i can speak the samelanguage, the same grammar that you all have. i can speak that. but when i m around, some people call it the hood, yeah, i can speak that slang and be comfortable in my language. it s like we borrow from both sides.
another bene t is that participants now exhibit a strong sense of rights with respect to their prerogative to live in any neighborhood. this can be seen in sharon s remarks regardingthe racial comments from some neighbors when, in 2001, she moved into her currentapartment in a mostly white neighborhood.
somebody screamed there s a nigger in the building and eventually moved out of the building. ...she s going to leave because of me . let her go then. i think i just have a right to be here as well as anyone else. i m not destructive, or anything andi m productive. and i m showing my productivity in the community by attendingthis church, by worshipping with these people.
in 1981 sharon initially moved from a neighborhood that was 100 per cent black and 72 per cent poor, to a chicago placement neighborhood that was 3 per cent black and 19 per cent poor. she was very reluctant to participate in the gautreaux program because she did not think that they were letting blacks live in white neighborhoods. now shebelieves that she should choose her neighborhood based on whether it meets her needs,such as proximity to work, safety and amenities. respondents stated that one of the keybene ts of the gautreaux program was experiencing and making concrete what it meant tolive in a safe, high resource neighborhood and internalizing the belief that their residentialoptions should not be restricted by arti cial boundaries.
current neighborhood ses composition overall, current neighborhood conditions, particularly socio economic conditions, are much better than now adult children s origin neighborhoods and, on average, are similarto placement neighborhoods . the proportion of poor residents is 17.9 per centfor current neighborhoods, which is slightly less poor than placement neighborhoods, both of which are substantially less poor than origin neighborhoods . as with neighborhood ethnic composition, there is substantial difference in the post placement mobility of children placed in the top and bottom quintilessecond generation residential attainment 553 downloaded by tulane university at 19 24 10 october 2014  of placement neighborhood ses. figure 2 shows that children placed in the poorest neighborhoods currently reside in neighborhoods that average19.4 per cent poor residents. compared to children placed in the least poor neighborhoods, who currently reside in neighborhoods that average 15.0 percent poor residents. figure 3 shows that the same pattern holds for neighborhood educationlevel. again, comparing the ses characteristics of children s and their mothers current neighborhoods shows that there has been no generational regress in neighborhood ses.
this surprising nding that children placed in both high and low ses placement neighborhoods currently reside in neighborhoods with somewhat similar levels of ses, is consistent withthe fact that gautreaux participants enrolled in the program, and were willing to move figure 2. now adult children and mother s placement and current neighborhood per cent poor554 m. keels downloaded by tulane university at 19 24 10 october 2014  to unknown neighborhoods because they were determined to live in higher quality neighborhoods.
this is exempli ed by sabrina s experiences. she moved with her three children from a downtown chicago neighborhood that was 83.1 per cent black and 42.1 per cent poor to asouth side chicago placement neighborhood that was 98.9 per cent black and 44.6 percent poor. sabrina believed that although her placement community was demographically similar to her origin neighborhood, it was a move out of public housing and a new start.
she perceived her placement neighborhood as having a better class of people and manymore employed neighbors. based on census records, her origin and placementneighborhoods had unemployment rates of 45 per cent and 34 per cent, respectively.
figure 3. now adult children and mother s placement and current neighborhood per cent with college degreesecond generation residential attainment 555 downloaded by tulane university at 19 24 10 october 2014  sabrina lived at her placement address for 11 years and then moved within chicago to a neighborhood that was 24 per cent black and 19 per cent poor. she did not move until shewas able to purchase a home.
 the placement neighborhood wasn t much better, but looking back i realize that everything was a steppingstone. it was better than where i was. i didn t know these people and they didn t know me, so it was a new start. and at that point in time it was better than where i was. ...it was a better place at that point for me. it was a better place for me and for my children, and it allowed, it changed me because ittook me away from the environment that i had, i was used to. it took me away fromsome of the people that i needed to get away from.
gautreaux participants were willing to move to unknown neighborhoods because it offered a new start and a chance at a better life. in the years since moving to their placement communities, respondents held onto this desire for residence in good neighborhoods, and it can be inferred from their children s outcomes that this preferencefor high resource neighborhoods was passed to their children. therefore, even thoughchildren placed in mostly black neighborhoods, in comparison to children placed in mostlywhite neighborhoods currently live in neighborhoods with signi cantly higher percentagesof black residents, they do not live in higher poverty neighborhoods. children placed inmostly black neighborhoods currently live inneighborhoods that average 61.0 per cent black and 18.6 per cent poor residents and children placed in mostly white neighborhoods currently live in neighborhoods that average 49.1 per cent black and 19.2 per cent poor residents.
ethnic resegregation without economic resegregation the ethnic resegregation observed among children placed in mostly white neighborhoods is not associated with economic resegregation, as evidenced by the fact that gautreaux children have maintained their placement neighborhood ses. so, while gautreaux children may prefer ethnically mixed neighborhoods, they appear unwilling to move tothem if they are associated with a low neighborhood ses. the importance thatrespondents placed on maintaining the gautreaux program induced improvements inneighborhood quality are re ected in sharon s statements with regard to moving back topublic housing after losing her section 8 certi cate. she lost her section 8 certi cate afterless than two years due to falling behind on her share of the rent. when asked why she didnot move back to public housing she said  that point on i knew i didn t want to go back to the projects. and from that point on i always lived in nice surroundings, had nice apartments. ...it s a certain type of living that i like. i like living where it s clean and quiet. ...because i love the ghetto, but i just can t live there. that s just too much noise for me. you know, toomuch, they re too busy. ...i d just rather live where i feel safe and comfortable ...
sharon stated that it has been dif cult to pay market rent, she works multiple jobs and learned to budget, but going back to public housing or an inner city neighborhood was not an option. most of the respondents interviewed work full time at relatively low wage jobs556 m. keels downloaded by tulane university at 19 24 10 october 2014  but earn too much to qualify for housing assistance, and because of the high cost of living in high resource neighborhoods they are struggling to meet their nancial needs. theymaintain residence in higher ses neighborhoods only by working multiple jobs,borrowing from family and friends and living check to check.
these ndings with regard to gautreaux participants strong desire to maintain residence in safe, high resource neighborhoods provide some clari cation for vale s  ndings concerning public housing residents profound ambivalence regarding satisfaction with residence in public housing and their desire to relocate. vale found thatdespite the dominance of negative feelings about the negative effects of gangs, guns anddrug related violence in and around public housing developments, the majority of publichousing residents expressed the wish to stay. the ndings presented in this paper show thatformer public housing residents can maintain residence in high quality neighborhoods, andthat exposure to the bene ts of residence in higher quality neighborhoods is critical forpeople s residential decisions.
city suburban divide as stated earlier, the magnitude of the change in neighborhood ethnicity and ses composition depended on whether children initially relocated to city or suburban locations.suburban communities were much more uniformly white and moderate or higher ses.the continued bene t of suburban residence can be seen in the nding that now adult children currently residing in the suburbs reside in higher quality neighborhoods than those currently residing in chicago. gautreaux children currently residing in the suburbs live inneighborhoods that average 28.5 per cent black and 10.6 per cent poor residents incomparison, the neighborhoods of now adult children currently residing in chicagoaverage 61.5 per cent black, 23.5 per cent poor residents.
the importance of exposure is evident mothers placed in the suburbs reported that their children continue to live in the suburbs because that is what they know, and theybelieve that their children are more comfortable in the suburbs than in chicago.
the role of exposure is exempli ed in the experiences of lois and her children. lois moved to the suburbs when her son was two years old and three years after moving to thesuburbs she had a daughter. all three continue to reside in the suburbs, in separateresidence, more than 21 years after moving via the gautreaux program.
i didn t even know the suburbs existed until i saw blue ridge. i wanted to raise my kids out here. i thought this would be better for them, a better education, a betterenvironment. they didn t have to deal with all the ducking and dodging of bullets.
 the suburbs is all they know ...he doesn t know anything about chicago. all they know is the suburbs.
mothers originally resided in poor inner city neighborhoods and it is likely that children grew up contrasting residence in safe high resource suburban neighborhoods compared toresidence in dangerous and disadvantaged chicago neighborhoods.
the quantitative and qualitative data indicate that gautreaux children placed in the suburbs were likely to stay, but without that exposure they were unlikely to move to the suburbs on their own. half of gautreaux participants were placed in suburban neighborhoods, and 60 per cent of now adult children placed in the suburbs continuesecond generation residential attainment 557 downloaded by tulane university at 19 24 10 october 2014  to reside in suburban communities. however, only 22 per cent of children placed within chicago currently reside in the suburbs.
conclusion this research has relevance for the hud s assisted housing policies as debate continues on the importance and bene ts of relocating voucher recipients into ethnically and economicallyintegrated neighborhoods. the current study has found no support for the argument that thecurrent clustering of black housing voucher recipients in ethnically and economically isolatedinner city neighborhoods is due to their preferences for those neighborhoods, since very fewgautreaux mothers and their now adult children returned to neighborhoods similar to theethnically and economically isolated ones that they left behind.
12 the study found that segregated neighborhoods are not preferred. the gautreaux program was designed to give low income, black, public housing families access and the means to obtain residence in mostly white communities. placement neighborhoods averaged 29.9 percent black residents and current neighborhoods averaged 44.5 per cent black residents. thisrepresents lasting change since based on the 2000 census the average black person in chicagoresided in a neighborhood that was 78 per cent black. the ethnically balanced composition ofnow adult children s current neighborhoods is in line with previous research, indicating thatblack families prefer to reside in integrated neighborhoods .
gautreaux children also currently reside in neighborhoods with substantially lower levels of poverty than their origin neighborhoods, origin, placement, and currentneighborhoods averaged 47.3 per cent, 19.4 per cent and 17.9 per cent poor respectively.this lasting reduction in neighborhood poverty is particularly important, becauseconcentrated poverty has a strong negative relationship with children s successfuldevelopment. consequently, future generations will probably bene t from the decision toparticipate in the gautreaux program.
for gautreaux s housing counselors to meet their goals they emphasized moving participants into chicago s overwhelmingly white suburban communities. suburban placement meant dramatic improvements in neighborhood minority and ses segregation,safety and public resources. gautreaux children placed in suburban communities,compared to those placed within chicago, experienced larger improvements inneighborhood quality, and gautreaux children continuing to reside in suburbancommunities currently reside in higher quality neighborhoods than those currentlyresiding in chicago. among children placed in the suburbs, there is a relatively highlikelihood of continued suburban residence, but without that exposure gautreaux children were unlikely to move to the suburbs. sixty per cent of now adult children placed in the suburbs continue to reside in suburban communities, whereas, only 22 per cent of now adult children placed within chicago relocated to suburban communities.
the program induced neighborhood changes for gautreaux participants are drastically different from the neighborhood changes experienced by mto participants. the mtoprogram determined placement neighborhoods based on poverty not ethnicity. mtoexperimental group families who moved to low poverty neighborhoods made shortdistance moves and continued to reside in overwhelmingly minority urban neighborhoods.
mto participants origin neighborhoods averaged 89 per cent minority residents and placement neighborhoods averaged 85 per cent minority residents. this lack of change558 m. keels downloaded by tulane university at 19 24 10 october 2014  in ethnic segregation for mto participants is in stark contrast to the reduction in minority segregation experienced by gautreaux participants. it appears as though targeting onneighborhood ethnic composition is necessary to change residential segregation.
future housing policy must carefully consider the importance of targeting on neighborhood ethnic composition since it appears as though ethnic integration bringseconomic integration, but economic integration does not bring ethnic integration.
additionally, researchers have shown that receiving neighborhoods are not negatively affected, and there are positive social interaction bene ts for participants and surroundingneighbors . that said, the study here agrees with briggs turner , who argue that census tract ethnic andpoverty composition are unreliable proxies for neighborhood quality. they advocate thatrelocation programs should explicitly identify the resources and opportunities available inpotential placement neighborhoods.
the principal limitation of these data is that the gautreaux program was the result of a court ordered desegregation ruling and not a research experiment. the ndings presented in this paper may therefore be biased by the extent to which program participants wereself selected and the program staff steered participants into particular placementneighborhoods. additionally, gautreaux participants were highly motivated, as evidencedby the fact that they were willing to be racial pioneers, and persisted for many years in theirplacement communities despite not being welcomed by many of their neighbors andsubstantial cultural isolation. however, this does not change the conclusion that most poorblack families and their children originally residing in very disadvantaged neighborhoods are able to translate the opportunity to move into higher quality neighborhoods into longterm residential improvement.
notes 1the leadership council was founded as the result of a campaign for open housing led by dr martin luther king, jr. in 1966. the leadership council s mission was to eliminate discrimination and segregation in metropolitan chicago housing markets.
2when the gautreaux court ruling was nalized in 1981, it included a provision to allow up to one third of participants to move to census tracts with more than 30 per cent black residents as long as they coulddemonstrate that it was a revitalizing community . a neighborhood is considered revitalizing if there is enough development activity underway or planned so that economic integration is likely in the short run and ethnic integration might follow in the long run. therefore, despite the program s desegre gation goal, a signi cant proportion of gautreaux participants were placed in predominantly blackneighborhoods.
3the gautreaux program included three selection criteria speci cally, not admitting families with morethan four children, large debts or unacceptable housekeeping . all three criteriareduced the eligible pool by less than 30 per cent.
4housing counselors noti ed families as apartments became available, counseled them about the advantages and disadvantages of these moves, and took them to visit the units and communities.
counselors offered units based on participants order of enrollment into the program. very few clientsrefused an offer because of the high quality of the units, and the knowledge that they were unlikely to get another offer due to the large number of families on the wait list .
5the effective take up rate would be based on the percentage of enrolled families that were also offered a housing voucher or certi cate that were able to lease a unit.
6compared with families currently living in chicago s distressed public housing developments, gautreaux families are demographically somewhat more advantaged .second generation residential attainment 559 downloaded by tulane university at 19 24 10 october 2014  7involuntary relocation is mobility into private market housing due to public housing redevelopment, coupled with substantial time pressures and minimal mobility counseling. under most current public housing redevelopment plans, fewer units are rebuilt and many residents will not meet the eligibilitycriteria for return .
8beginning in the 1990s, families were also given the opportunity to search for their own units. by 1990 the rental market was strong enough to allow the leadership council to eliminate its real estate staff.
given this, and the fact that beginning in the 1990s housing choices offered to participating familieswere limited to only suburban addresses, these analyses are con ned to families moving between 1976and 1989 .
9although it would have been ideal to interview now adult children directly, this was not attemptedbecause many gautreaux mothers did not discuss participation in the gautreaux program with theirchildren. only interviewing children whose mothers rst gave approval would have led to a biased sample.
10an index of neighborhood disadvantage based on mother s current address, crime and poverty was used to select the 25 respondents interviewed. the 25 respondents had an index of disadvantage thatranged from two to eight, representing almost the full range of the index of current neighborhood disadvantage. at the low end, respondents current neighborhoods ranged from a high of 32 per cent poor, and at the high end respondents current neighborhoods ranged from a low of 2 per cent poor.
11thompson reported that public housing families reside in assisted housing for an average of 7.5years, and multiple program participants, who moved between public housing and housing voucher programs, resided in assisted housing for an average of 6.3 years.
12it is important to remind readers that gautreaux families relocated because of the pull of potential destination neighborhoods. current public housing residents in developments undergoing substantialredevelopment are relocating because of the push of public housing authorities.
references