applied geography 125 102364 available online 30 october 2020 0143 6228 2020 elsevier ltd. all rights reserved.on the link between rail transit and spatial income segregation  isabelle nilsson , elizabeth c. delmelle  department of geography earth sciences, university of north carolina at charlotte, charlotte, usa  article info  keywords  public transit  income diversity  income segregation  neighborhood change abstract  the link between transportation infrastructure and income segregation has long been recognized in the literature, but has received renewed attention with the increased investment in rail transit in us cities. in this paper,  we examine the impacts of rail transit investments on neighborhood income diversity and metropolitan income  segregation. for the neighborhood level analysis, we apply a difference in difference approach combined with  propensity score matching in 11 metropolitan areas that invested in rail transit between 2000 and 2005. we then  estimate the effect of changes in rail transit access on income segregation across the 50 largest metropolitan areas  in the us between 1990 and 2010. we find no statistical evidence that rail transit investments spur changes in  neighborhood income diversity when compared to similar neighborhoods elsewhere in the city. similarly, we  find no significant impact of new or expanded rail transit lines on metropolitan wide income segregation.  1.introduction  residential segregation by income has increased across most major  metropolitan areas in the united states every decade since 1970 . these increases have been driven by a rising share  of individuals and households living in neighborhoods that are majority  lower or upper income, and a declining share of those in more moderate  or mixed income neighborhoods . these  trends are concerning given the wealth of literature that documents the  detrimental effects that long term exposure to neighborhood poverty  has on a host of individual outcomes including poorer academic  achievement, adversary health outcomes, and a reduced chance of  experiencing upward social mobility, among others .  increases in income segregation have occurred alongside rising levels  of income inequality as the income gap between the richest and poorest  residents has widened, so too have their spatial separation . while income inequality is a significant  predictor of spatial segregation, it is not the sole explanatory factor  . research on other underlying causes of the  growing separation of households by income has received far less  attention than research on racial segregation or inequality, though these  concepts are intertwined . in particular,  the role of metropolitan wide policies in shaping the geography of income segregation are not well understood . the purpose of this article is to examine how one such policy, the implementation of a  new rail transit system, contributes to income segregation at the  neighborhood and metropolitan scale for multiple cities across the  united states.  the past two decades have been characterized by a rail renaissance  in cities across the united states in an effort to both encourage transit  use and as an urban redevelopment or branding strategy . one  contention accompanying these large scale public investments is the  perception that cities compromise the potential social benefits of  increasing accessibility to a transit dependent population by favoring  economic development possibilities . the idea that  transit may spur gentrification and displacement has garnered a body of  literature examining this paradox . the evidence to date suggests that transit may play some role in  accelerating gentrification, but the effects vary considerably by  geographic context .  in this article, we expand this line of research to draw a conceptual  link between new transit investments and income segregation at both  the neighborhood and metropolitan scale. we hypothesize that new rail  transit investments, which are not placed uniformly across a city,  contribute to uneven development patterns that give rise to increasing  levels of income segregation. areas surrounding new stations attract  new developments, re shape surrounding land values and alter residential mobility patterns into and out of nearby neighborhoods. those   corresponding author.  e mail address inilsso1 uncc.edu .  contents lists available at sciencedirect  applied geography  u zkw s yo kro s 22 1 ow o to 1m y2w mk o2k r o r  https doi.org 10.1016 j.apgeog.2020.102364  received 11 may 2020 received in revised form 16 september 2020 accepted 27 october 2020 applied geography 125 102364 2with greater financial resources are attracted to these newly developed  areas and those priced out seek housing in a more restrictive housing  market causing concentrations of poverty to deepen as wealth accumulates along the new transit line. we test our hypothesis and conceptual framework in a study of income segregation at the neighborhood  scale in 11 us metropolitan areas that invested in rail transit  between 2000 and 2005. we employ a difference in differences  modeling approach combined with propensity score matching to identify a plausible set of control neighborhoods in each city. the use of  proper counterfactuals in prior transit neighborhood change studies was  identified as a shortcoming in the existing body of research, and a  possible contributor to the variation in results across studies . second, to understand how transit investments may  reshape the broader metropolitan income segregation landscape, we  estimate the effect of changes in rail transit access on an index of income  segregation across the 50 largest msas in the united states between  1990 and 2010. overall, this article contributes to our understanding of  how large public investments may or may not contribute to the exacerbation of unequal landscapes of opportunity in a systematic manner  across multiple us cities and from a multi scalar perspective.  2.related literature  income segregation can be explained as an outcome of interactions  between individual and structural factors operating at multiple spatial  scales . individual  preferences for certain types of housing, locations within the urban  environment, and associated amenities combined with the monetary  ability to realize these preferences create the supply and demand  mechanisms that serve to sort residents according to income . individuals have also shown a strong tendency to live in neighborhoods comprised of residents like themselves .  structural considerations help explain significant socioeconomic differences across urban spaces including characteristics of the local  economy that may exacerbate spatial inequalities historical patterns of racial discrimination and disinvestment and uneven development spurred by public investments, for example .  at the metropolitan scale, empirical research has identified city wide  characteristics that offer some explanation for higher or lower levels of  income segregation including an msa s size and growth rate. segregation is higher in larger metropolitan areas with fast growing populations  , in denser cities , but also in sprawling more decentralized urban areas  including those with density restrictions . we  next outline our conceptual framework explaining how a public investment such as transit may contribute to income segregation.  2.1. conceptual framework  our conceptual framework for understanding the relationship between a new public investment such as transit and income segregation is  summarized in fig. 1. public transit is expected to spur changes in land  values and rents given the longstanding role that accessibility plays in  shaping urban land price gradients . new transit oriented developments around stations offer additional amenities beyond accessibility that are expected to generate  increased local demand . the literature is  generally in agreement that new rail transit stations lead to some price  capitalization effects, but the magnitude varies depending on local and  metropolitan contexts strong economic and population growth, proximity to other amenities, center city locations and walk and ride stations  all appear to strengthen this relationship . these latter considerations reinforce recent reinvestigations onto the declining importance of commuting costs and accessibility versus proximity to the central city in explaining residential sorting . traditional land price gradients are undergoing a  reversal across many north american cities.  changes in land values have the potential to alter who moves into  and out of nearby locations rising property values and rents may lead  to an influx of more affluent residents and a disproportionate out  migration of lower income residents. this relationship forms the crux  of the transit induced displacement hypothesis . the empirical evidence on residential movements is rather  limited, but two studies that examine residential mobility using the  panel study on income dynamics across the united states and property tax records in los angeles , respectively, find no evidence that lower income residents have  heightened out mobility rates in new transit neighborhoods. using  housing mortgage data for the city of charlotte, north carolina, delmelle et al. uncover a significant shift in the racial profile of  mortgage applicants in new transit neighborhoods in charlotte, north  carolina, but not in their income profile. this relationship was most  pronounced in neighborhoods accompanied by other attractive amenities such as walkability, proximity to the center city and previously  gentrified neighborhoods.  the aggregate result of these residential movements are changes to a  neighborhood s socioeconomic composition. there has been a recent  flurry of literature addressing the extent to which new transit stations  lead to gentrification or other forms of neighborhood changes. mirroring  the price capitalization literature, the bulk of this more recent work has  found changes to be highly context dependent, and not necessarily the  norm . walk and ride stations and neighborhoods located in faster grower urban areas are more likely to  undergo gentrification type changes . in an analysis of  neighborhood income change in dallas, finds that  while overall, access to transit led to increases in neighborhood scale  incomes, this relationship was strongest for neighborhoods that were  initially more well off. poorer neighborhoods saw either no or negative  income changes. some of the variations in findings from these studies  have been attributed to a lack of consistent research design and a failure  to use a quasi experimental approach to control for broader metropolitan trends .  the outer circle in our diagram represents exogenous agents who  influence this process in a way that changes are not expected to be  uninform across or within all metropolitan areas. these agents can aid in  producing gentrification by encouraging the movement of capital into  previously disinvested parts of the city or by  fig. 1.conceptual framework on link between rail transit investments and  income segregation. i. nilsson and e.c. delmelle applied geography 125 102364 3advertising access to transit as a luxury amenity in certain neighborhoods, for example .  while in the short run, at the neighborhood level, the arrival of more  affluent residents can result in increased neighborhood diversity with a  mix of higher and lower income households sharing space. in the long  run, the neighborhood could potentially become less diverse if higher  income households replace long term lower income residents  . such changes at the neighborhood level could influence city level spatial patterns of income segregation. if rail transit investments lead to a reduced number of neighborhoods with affordable  housing, it could contribute to increased concentration of poverty in a  few neighborhoods. however, if it results in the dispersion of  higher income residents into a greater number of neighborhoods,  reducing the number of affluent neighborhoods, it could contribute to  less segregation. therefore, studying transit s impact on segregation  calls for an investigation at both a neighborhood and metropolitan scale.  3.data and methodology  for this study, we use data from the longitudinal tract database   , the us census bureau , and ipums adjusted to 2010  census tract boundaries using ltdb crosswalks.1 the ltdb and ipums  provide census data at different geographic scales that has been integrated across time and space which allows us to study changes in various  socioeconomic and demographic variables over time. the main source  for the neighborhood analysis is the ltdb which has been  complemented with variables from ipums national historical  geographic information system while the variables for the  msa level analysis mainly come from ipums nhgis, complemented  with more recent data from the us census bureau. metropolitan statistical areas also change boundaries over time with counties  added or removed from the msa. we use 2010 urbanized area and msa  boundary definitions from the us census. however, an issue in studying  urban income segregation using msas, is that they can be very large and  include upwards of 30 counties , many which are primarily rural. msas are based on commuting flows, not necessarily  migration patterns, so if rail transit is implemented in the urban core, it  is unlikely that this would significantly affect residential sorting in  fourth order neighboring, rural counties. therefore, we restrict our  analysis to the counties within the msa that contain at least 5 of the  urbanized area2 of the urban core. fig. 2 illustrates this, using the msas  of atlanta, birmingham, charlotte, and nashville as examples, showing  which counties were included and excluded from the analysis.  to assess difference in trends before and after opening, we need to  observe at least three time stamps. as racial classifications in the  decennial census changed after 1970 and there is a lack of available of  high resolution population data prior to 1990, our first time period of  observation is 1990. to study pre and post trends, we only include  msas that opened a rail transit line between 2000 and 2005 in the  neighborhood level analysis. these will have 2000 as their pre period  and 2010 as their post period. this limits heterogeneity in the time  period between the pre year and implementation, and between the  implementation and post year. given that no heavy rail line opened in  the us during this time period, we only examine the effects of light rail  transit. the resulting 11 msas with light rail lines that opened between  2000 and 2005 are shown in table 1. for the msa level analysis of income segregation, we use the 50 most populous msas in the us as of the  2010 census . station data comes from the center for transit oriented development and has been  verified and supplemented by the authors.  to study income segregation over time and between metropolitan  areas, ordinal measures that consider the rank ordering of incomes are  recommended as they separate segregation from inflation and changes  in income inequality over time . ordinal  measures necessitate the construction of income categories. we use  definitions described in the home mortgage disclosure act and  community reinvestment act to classify families into low,  moderate, middle, and upper income . low income households are those whose income is less than 50 of the msa median household income.  moderate income households are those with an income of at least 50  and less than 80 , middle income at least 80 and less than 120 , and  finally, upper income means that the household income is 120 or more  of msa median household income. census data on number of households by 15 income categories for 1990, 2000 and 2010 comes from ipums and were converted to 2010 census tract boundaries using  the crosswalks from the ltdb website. we chose the income categories  provided in the census data that come closest to matching the hmda  and cra income categories. using the hmda cra classification has the  advantage of making the classification both time and msa specific since  it is relative to the individual msa income levels at each time stamp.  to measure neighborhood diversity and metropolitan level income  segregation, we follow freeman who suggests the use of metrics  where higher and lower values indicate greater and lower diversity,  and neighborhood income diversity can be used to construct an  msa level measure of income segregation. therefore, to measure  neighborhood income diversity we use the index of ordinal variation   which satisfies these criteria and is calculated as  follows  hi 1 k 1 k 1 k 14ck 1 ck  where k is the number of ordinal categories or levels and ck is the cumulative proportion of the total number of households at level k or lower. the index  measures the average deviation of each level when there is no variation  . it reaches its  maximum value of 1 when the number of households in a tract is evenly  split between the highest and lowest ranked income categories and its  minimum when households is divided among all the income categories.  for example, a neighborhood with its households weighted towards low  and upper income households will receive a higher value and be  considered more diverse than a neighborhood with predominately  moderate and middle income households.  following freeman s and reardon and bischoff s  approach, we use the information theory index to measure income  segregation at the msa level. this index measures the extent to which  the average neighborhood level entropies deviate from the maximum  entropy for the entire msa and is calculated as follows  hs n i 1wi hm hi  wh m  where hi is the neighborhood level entropy and hm is the msa level  entropy, wi is the number of households at the neighborhood level and  w is the total number of households in the msa. the information index  is the weighted average of the proportional difference between the  neighborhood level entropies and the msa level entropy . it ranges from 0 to 1 where a score of zero indicates that the  income composition of every neighborhood mirrors that of the entire  msa. a score of 1 indicates that only one group is present in each 1 https s4.ad.brown.edu projects diversity researcher ltdb1.htm .  2 definition of urbanized area which is used by the office of management and  budget to define msas https www.census.gov programs surveys geograph  y guidance geo areas urban rural 2010 urban rural.html https www.nal.  usda.gov ric what is rural . i. nilsson and e.c. delmelle applied geography 125 102364 4neighborhood .  3.1. empirical models  to estimate the difference in neighborhood diversity between transit   and control neighborhoods, we combine propensity score  matching and difference in differences estimations. difference  in differences is a method used for assessing causal inference of a  treatment on an outcome. it compares changes in an outcome over time between a population that has received the treatment and a population that has not . comparing neighborhoods that received and did not receive a  rail transit station can be difficult if there are unobserved reasons for  why some neighborhoods received the investment and others did not,  causing bias in the estimated effect . since the  assignment of which neighborhoods receive rail transit stations is not  random, we utilize psm to find control neighborhoods  that are similar to and have a similar probability of receiving a rail  transit station, but that did not. psm for findings suitable controls in  analyses of causal inference in the social and health sciences where  randomized experiments are difficult have been widely applied .  while both methods have risks for bias, the risk can be reduced by  combining them, offsetting the limitations of a single method and  increasing the robustness of the results . while psm  can achieve balance on observed covariates, meaning subjects in the  treatment and control group are similar in terms of observable characteristics except for the treatment , it cannot  account for unobserved characteristics. using matched  difference in difference accounts for unobserved characteristics that are  constant across time . however, there are also risks  of inducing bias by using matching in difference in difference analyses,  particularly when matching on pre treatment period levels of the  outcome variable or on time varying covariates with low serial correlation .   treated neighborhoods in this study are identified as census tracts  fig. 2.example of delineation of urban core counties of msas.  table 1  msas and rail lines included in the neighborhood level analysis.  msa lines year of  opening city s first rail  transit line  dallas dart red 2000 2002 no  denver rtd c 2002 no  houston metrorail red 2004 yes  los angeles metro rail gold l 2003 no  minneapolis metro blue 2004 yes  philadelphia nj transit  rail riverline light  rail 2004 no  portland max yellow 2004 no  salt lake city trax red 2001 no  san diego trolley green 2005 no  santa clara vta light  rail tasman east,  capitol, vasona 2001 2004,  2005 no  st. louis metrolink  metro blue 2001 2003 no i. nilsson and e.c. delmelle applied geography 125 102364 5that intersect a 0.25 mile buffer of a rail transit station. the census tract  is the smallest geographic unit for which data is consistently recorded  since 1980 and for which we can account for changes in boundaries over  time, necessitating their use as a proxy for a neighborhood. the use of a  quarter mile buffer is simply a means of selecting those census tracts in  closest proximity to the transit station. since census tracts can be fairly  large, the treatment areas are likely to extend beyond the 0.25 to 0.5  mile distance usually assumed as the distance people are willing to  walk to a transit stop. however, research suggest that transit oriented  planning areas should be extended up to one mile . while direct economic  benefits around rail transit stations in the form of new developments  may occur in the immediate proximity around a station, secondary, indirect effects including property value increases stemming from spatial  proximity to both the station and new developments around it are expected to occur beyond this immediate area. research on price capitalization of new transit stations has shown positive impacts to occur a  mile or more from new stations . so, while census tracts are imperfect  neighborhood proxies, based on our conceptual framework linking new  transit stations with rising property values rents and subsequent changes  in the income profile of residents, we expect impacts on sorting and  consequently segregation to be felt beyond the immediate area surrounding a station.  to minimize potential bias in the psm procedure used to find suitable control neighborhoods, we do not include the outcome variable  itself. we do include time variant characteristics in the matching procedure as the literature as shown that neighborhoods characteristics are  typically slow to change .  we therefore expect these to have strong serial correlation, further  reducing the risk of inducing bias in our estimates. our time variant  variables include population density, percent black, hispanic, and  asian, percent with a bachelor s degree or more, percent manufacturing  employees, percent unemployed, percent in poverty, percent female  headed households, percent owner occupied housing units, percent  multi family units, median home value, median rent, and percent of  structures less than 10 and more than 30 years old . these come from the 2000 census, the decade before  opening. in addition, we include the following time invariant characteristics the county in which the tract is located in to account for variations in local government programs and amenities, and the distance  from the city center.  we apply stepwise logistic regressions to each msa to identify the  strongest predictors of treatment from the above to include in the estimation of propensity scores. while all msas have some common determinants in which neighborhoods are most likely receive a station , there are local variations in  terms of racial make up, new construction versus older housing stock,  etc. models for each city are therefore slightly different to accommodate  for local conditions in finding the most suitable controls. tracts intersecting a one mile buffer of an existing or future rail transit station are  not included in the matching process. we apply an optimal matching  algorithm with a 1 1 matching ratio by msa  to find a possible set of controls for each group of treatment neighborhoods within each msa.3 we assess the balance of covariates  between the treatment and control group through both numerical and  graphical summaries following ho et al. .  after finding a suitable control group, we estimate the following  difference in difference model through ordinary least squares  div it 1treat i 2post t 3treat i post t xit it  where i indexes the neighborhood and t the census year. div it is the  neighborhood diversity index measuring ordinal variation across income groups described in previous section. treat i and post t control for  initial between group differences and time period differences, respectively. xit is a vector of controls including msa level fixed effects, distance to the cbd, share of multi family units and owner occupied  housing in year 2000. our difference in difference estimator, 3 is given  by the interaction between treat i and post t and is our coefficient of interest. it measures whether neighborhoods near transit experienced  significantly higher or lower levels of neighborhood diversity after the  opening of the station compared to the control group.  since many of the 50 msas included in our msa level analysis  already had some rail transit lines before 1990, we cannot estimate a  did model at the msa level. therefore, we estimate the effect of changes  in rail transit access on income segregation using the following fixed  effects model  seg it 1tait 2git zit i t uit  where i indexes the msa and t the census year. seg it is the information  theory index measuring evenness in among income groups, in msa i  at year t. tait is a proxy for the level of rail transit access in msa i in  decade t measured as the proportion of the population living in neighborhoods with access to light or heavy rail transit. this is calculated as  the population in census blocks that intersect a mile buffer, divided it  by the total population in the msa, by decade. the variable git is a  measure of income inequality measured with the gini index.4 zit is a  vector of controls including metropolitan demographic, housing, and  labor market characteristics .5 finally, we  include msa and decade fixed effects.  4.results  to examine the balance between our treatment and control group,  we calculate the difference in means in several neighborhood  3common practice is to use nearest neighbor matching, a greedy algorithm, where the closest control match for each treated unit is chosen one at a  time. while these algorithms minimize the distance within each matched pair,  it does not minimize the total distance within matched pairs. optimal  matching algorithms on the other hand finds the matched samples with the  smallest average absolute distance across all matched pairs. while greedy and  optimal matching approaches generally choose the same set of controls for the  overall matched samples, optimal matching is sometimes noticeably better in producing closely matched pairs .  4 the gini index is a standard summary measure of income inequality. it is  based on the difference between the observed cumulative income distribution  of a region and the notion of a perfectly equal income distribution. the index  ranges from 0, indicating perfect equality , to 1, indicating perfect inequality . our estimates come from the census bureau at the county level and  averaged across included counties by msa .  5 these include msa level white population , older than 65 and younger  than 18 years old , with at least a high school diploma , foreign born  , manufacturing sector employment , finance, insurance, and real estate  employment , unemployment rate, in migration rate , new  construction proxied by new building permits , and female  headed households with children under 18 years old . i. nilsson and e.c. delmelle applied geography 125 102364 6characteristics in 2000, the pre period. this is done by msa and the full  sample with results for the latter presented in table 2.6 overall, the  differences between the treatment and control group are small7 with  some distinctions in distance to the city center ,  percent owner occupied housing in the treatment neighborhoods and percent  multi family housing units . while the assumption of the difference in differences method  does not require pre treatment conditions to be the same for the results  to be valid, we control for such differences in our estimations.  next, we examine whether there are obvious violations of the parallel trend assumption of the difference in differences estimator. to be  valid, the control group must exhibit a similar trend to the treatment  group in the pre treatment period to serve as  a counterfactual . means of the dependent variable  in 1990, 2000, and 2010 are plotted by msa in fig. 3 and for the full  sample in fig. 6. these provide visual confirmation that the trends between the treatment and controls are similar in the pre treatment  period, indicated by the vertical dashed line.  the graphs in fig. 3 display similar trends in the mean of the  dependent variable, hi , between the treatment  and control group prior to 2000 for all msas. the divergence in trends  between 2000 and 2010 varies by msa and underscores the importance  of controlling for the msa in both the psm and in the difference in  difference estimations. from these graphs, we can discern several distinctions between msas in their treatment and control trends. for  instance, denver, minneapolis, and portland show an overall increase in  neighborhood income diversity from 1990 to 2000, but after 2000, diversity in treatment neighborhoods continued to rise while it declined or  remained stagnant in control neighborhoods. houston, philadelphia, and san diego also saw an increase in income  diversity during the pre treatment period, followed by a decline for both  groups post 2000. treatment neighborhoods in san diego saw a more  rapid decline than in the control group. in dallas and st. louis, diversity  remained stagnant between 1990 and 2000, but underwent a decline in  both groups after 2000. los angeles stands out with a decline in the pre  treatment period, but an increase post treatment. overall, the rate of  increase in income diversity between 2000 and 2010 appears greater in  the rail transit neighborhoods than in the control neighborhoods.  to understand what is driving changes in neighborhood diversity,  fig. 4 shows the change in distribution of income classes for each msa.  we grouped the moderate and middle income classes in this figure to  get a better sense of how the low and upper income classes have  changed over time. from the figure, we observe two contrasting trends  a decrease in low income and increase in upper income residents in the  case of houston, los angeles, philadelphia and portland or an increase  in low income and decrease in upper income residents in dallas, san  diego and st. louis. san jose s treatment neighborhoods also saw an  increase in the share of low income residents, but the upper income  segment remained stable. treatment neighborhoods in minneapolis  and, to a lesser extent, salt lake city experienced an increase in higher  income residents, but the share of low income residents remained the  same between 2000 and 2010. denver saw an increase in moderate  middle income classes alongside a shrinking share of lower and  upper income residents. across all msas, changes in shares are strikingly small as is evidenced by the narrow range of the y axis in figs. 3  and 6.  three examples illustrating both changes in diversity and income are  shown for the cases of san diego, portland, and minneapolis in fig. 5. in  the maps, neighborhoods falling in the upper right quadrat of the legend  have undergone increases in diversity coupled with rising incomes.  neighborhoods that increased in diversity, but whose share of high  income households did not increase fall in the upper right quadrat.  conversely, those with low increases in diversity, but high increases in  high income household shares are on the bottom right quadrat. the case  of san diego indicates that census tracts along the light rail corridor  largely did not see significant increases in high incomes, and most had  low increases in income diversity as well. the exception are three tracts  towards the west of the corridor that show high changes in diversity  coupled with low increases in income these are likely driving the results  displayed in fig. 4 that indicated a slight decline in upper income levels  and rises in lower income level groups. portland and minneapolis  highlight an opposite spatial pattern along the rail corridor with rising  shares of high income levels along most tracts. more tracts in minneapolis show a combined rising income and diversity pattern compared to  portland where tracts are split between rising income and either rising  or declining diversity. overall, these three examples again emphasize  the heterogeneity that occurs both within and between metropolitan  areas.  when we aggregate the msa treatment and control samples into one  combined sample, both the mean levels and trends in hi are very similar  between 1990 and 2000 . the divergence in trends post 2000  show both groups experienced a decline in income diversity, but the  rate of decline was slightly lower in the treatment group. as expected  from fig. 3, once averaging out across all msas, the changes across time  periods are quite small .  to analyze these trends in a more systematic fashion, we estimate the  difference in difference model both in a reduced form, without additional neighborhood controls, and its full form as described in equation  . the results are reported in table 3. the reduced form model shows  no significant change in income diversity following the opening of a rail  transit station as indicated by our difference in difference estimator, the  coefficient of treatment post, controlling for initial differences between the treatment and control group, time period differences, and  msa level unobservables. the coefficients for the treatment and post table 2  difference in means between treatment and control group in 2000.  mean  treatment control difference  population density 2.61 2.62 0.01  distance to cbd 1.72 2.02 0.3  black 14.15 14.49 0.34  hispanic 21.80 21.52 0.38  asian 10.72 10.54 0.18  manufacturing employment   12.50 12.57 0.07  unemployment 7.19 6.46 0.73  bachelor s degree or more 29.79 29.84 0.05  poverty 16.22 14.52 1.70  female headed households   8.82 8.98 0.16  owner occupied housing 43.26 48.93 5.67  multi family units 46.56 39.19 7.37  median home value 171.58   173.00   1.42  median rent 663.37   678.24   14.87  structures f30 years old 59.74 59.02 0.72  structures d10 years old 67.34 65.50 1.84  n 239 239  6 while it is common to perform t test on the difference in means, performing  hypothesis testing to assess balance between treatment and control samples is  highly misleading and should not be used to assess balance as demonstrated by  imai et al. .  7 this result hold by msa as well which is how the treatment and control was  originally constructed. the balance between the treatment and control sample  was further assessed using graphical output such as histograms and jitter plots.  due to space limitations we do not include them in the paper but they are  available from the authors upon request. i. nilsson and e.c. delmelle applied geography 125 102364 7variables verify the trend in fig. 6 with lower levels of diversity in the  treatment neighborhoods in the pre period and a reduction in  diversity in both groups in the post period . after controlling for  other neighborhood characteristics which we saw had some more  distinctive differences in table 2 including distance to the city center  and the share of owner occupied and multi family housing, the sign of  the difference in difference estimator does not change but the magnitude is reduced. it remains insignificantly different from the trend in the  control neighborhoods.  given differences found by msa in fig. 3, we run model 2 by msa  without msa fixed effects. results of interest are shown in table 4.  while the signs of the estimated coefficient for the difference in  difference estimator varies across cities, none of them are statistically  significant. whether it was the msa s first rail transit line or not does not appear to make a difference in the results.  to test the robustness of the model we estimated the model with an  alternative specification of the dependent variable based on a more  disaggregate set of income categories. for this specification, we used  seven income categories based on quintiles ranging from households  with incomes less than 20 of the msa median household to those with  incomes of more than 120 of msa median household income. model  test statistics and estimated coefficients of variables of interest as well as other explanatory variables  remain qualitatively the same.8 all but the sign and significance of the  distance to downtown variable in model 2, table 3 which becomes  significant at the 5 level and negative with a magnitude of 0.004. this  would suggest neighborhood income diversity is lower towards the city center.  as a final robustness check, we run the full model specification for  the full sample on varying definitions of what is considered a rail transit   tract, beyond our original definition of intersecting a  0.25 mile euclidean buffer around the station. the different definitions  include tracts that intersect a station s 0.25 and 0.50 network service  area and tracts where at least 25 , 50 or 75 of the total tract area is  covered by the 0.5 mile service area. these results are presented in  table 5 and indicate no qualitative change in the interpretation of the  results from the original model specification in table 3.  in summary, based on all the results pertaining to income diversity at  the neighborhood level, we find no statistical evidence that rail transit  investments spur changes in neighborhood income diversity when  compared to similar neighborhoods elsewhere in the city.  we now turn to the msa level results on urban income segregation  for the 50 largest msas in table 6. with respect to our variable of interest, the block level population within a half mile of a transit station, as  a share of the total population, we again find no statistically significant  results.9  as for the remaining control variables, we find that the share of white  and foreign born residents in an msa reduces income segregation this  could be explained by greater homogeneity in income diversity between  fig. 3.treatment vs. control trends by msa.  8 full regression results from these models are available from the authors on  request. 9 several robustness checks on the model were performed including without  msa and year fixed effects, share of black instead of share of white population,  and checks for multicollinearity between variables. results remain qualitatively  the same. the model in table 6 was chosen based on model performance indicators and tests. there is a risk of overfitting in the current model. however,  given robustness in results, we choose to keep the fixed effects in order to not  bias estimated coefficients of other variables through msa or time unobservables. models without msa and year fixed effects has r2s of 0.40. i. nilsson and e.c. delmelle applied geography 125 102364 8neighborhoods in less racially diverse cities. cities with a large share of  children and new construction are associated with higher levels of income segregation. these results may be explained by the literature s emphasis on the  role of school quality on sorting and the impact of growing housing  markets on increases in income segregation .  we estimated this model as well with a dependent variable constructed from the set of seven income categories based on quintiles, as  explained earlier. the results remain robust with no significant changes  to model test statistic or sign, magnitude, or significance of the estimated coefficients.10  5.concluding remarks  this paper contributes to the literature by studying the effect of  transit investments on neighborhood income diversity and subsequent metropolitan level urban income segregation. using a case study of 11  msas that implemented a new light rail transit line between 2000 and  2005, we find no statistical evidence that proximity to new stations  spurred significantly different changes in nearby neighborhood income  diversity, compared to similar neighborhoods elsewhere in the city.  overall, the changes in shares of different income groups between 1990,  2000, and 2010 in new transit neighborhoods were strikingly small  across the 11 msas studied. consistent with these results, we then found  no significant impact of accessibility to rail transit stations on  metropolitan wide income segregation in the 50 largest msas in the  united states. instead, we find that income segregation is positively  associated with the share of children in the population and growing  housing markets.  these findings contribute to the current literature on the relationship  between rail transit investments and income segregation by more closely  investigating changes in share of different income groups in transit  neighborhoods compared to those occurring in similar neighborhoods.  this approach has some advantages over those that rely on median income to study neighborhood changes given the significant heterogeneity  both within and across cities that may mask the nuances of what is  fig. 4.distribution of income classes in treatment group by msa.  10 full regression results from these models are available from the authors on  request. i. nilsson and e.c. delmelle applied geography 125 102364 9 fig. 5.changes in neighborhood diversity and income 1980 2000 in san diego, portland, and minneapolis .  fig. 6.treatment vs. control trends combined for all msas. i. nilsson and e.c. delmelle applied geography 125 102364 10driving changes. this is a sentiment emphasized in heilmann s  analysis of income changes along dallas transit corridor where neighborhood changes were found to be contingent upon their initial income  composition rising in already wealthy neighborhoods and declining in  poorer ones. we too uncover divergent trends both between and within  msas, rendering generalizable statements on the role of transit on  shaping income segregation nearly impossible. according to our analysis, the net impact of transit alone on neighborhood income profiles  and metropolitan segregation trends are minimal. this is consistent with  the evidence emerging in the literature that has attempted to quantify  the transit induced gentrification and displacement hypothesis at both  the neighborhood and individual scale. thus far, there is some evidence  that new transit investments in already wealthy neighborhoods, combined with other attractive amenity may lead to some observable sorting  changes . however, this outcome is more of an exception rather than the  norm, as we have demonstrated in this analysis. this is not to say that no  changes are felt in neighborhoods where we have found insignificant results there may be less quantifiable changes as new developments are  placed in the immediate vicinity of a station including feelings of a loss  of place or exclusion from the planning process that studies such as these  cannot account for . this  challenge is not unique to the transit literature of course as gentrification  studies more broadly have grappled with conflicting findings between  qualitative and quantitative analyses . however, it does underscore the need for complementary analyses on the experiences of residents in neighborhoods where we  have found no significant effects.  the analysis performed in this paper is subject to limitations. census  tract are rather large, and though we performed robustness checks to  include only tracts that were largely covered by a half mile walking  service area, it is certainly plausible that changes are very localized and  overlooked by this unit of analysis. our regression analysis examines  averages, meaning that local variations across neighborhoods are not  reported. there may be instances where changes are a significant  problem that are masked in the overall results.  credit authorship contribution statement  isabelle nilsson conceptualization, methodology, formal analysis,  investigation, writing original draft, writing review editing,  visualization, funding acquisition. elizabeth c. delmelle conceptualization, methodology, formal analysis, investigation, writing original draft, writing review editing, visualization, funding  acquisition.  declaration of competing interest  the authors declared no potential conflict of interest with respect to  the research, authorship, and or publication of this article.  acknowledgements  this work was supported by the national science foundation under  grant number 1759714.  appendix a.supplementary data  supplementary data to this article can be found online at https doi.  org 10.1016 j.apgeog.2020.102364 .  references