 sage publications, inc. and american sociological association are collaborating with jstor to digitize, preserve and extend   access to american sociological review.
http www.jstor.org take the money and run economic segregation in u.s. metropolitan areas  author paul a. jargowsky  source american sociological review, vol. 61, no. 6 , pp. 984 998 published by american sociological association stable url http www.jstor.org stable 2096304 accessed 23 12 2015 13 19 utc your use of the jstor archive indicates your acceptance of the terms conditions of use, available at http www.jstor.org page   info about policies terms.jsp jstor is a not for profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content  in a trusted digital archive. we use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship.  for more information about jstor, please contact support jstor.org.
this content downloaded from 198.91.37.2 on wed, 23 dec 2015 13 19 34 utc all use subject to jstor terms and conditionstake the money and run  economic segregation in u.s. metropolitan areas  paul a. jargowsky  university of texas at dallas  compared to residential segregation by race, economic segregation has re  ceived relatively little attention in recent empirical literature. yet a heated  debate has arisen concerning wilson s hypothesis that increasing eco  nomic segregation among african americans plays a role in the formation of  urban ghettos. i present a methodological critique of the measure of eco  nomic segregation used by massey and eggers and argue that their  measure confounds changes in the income distribution with spatial changes.  i develop a pure measure of economic segregation based on the correla  tion ratio and present findings for all u.s. metropolitan areas from 1970 to  1990. economic segregation increased steadily for whites, blacks, and his  panics in the 1970s and 1980s, but the increases have been particularly large  and widespread for blacks and hispanics in the 1980s. i explore the causes  of these changes in a reduced form, fixed effects model. social distance and  structural economic transformations affect economic segregation, but the  large increases in economic segregation among minorities in the 1980s can  not be explained by the model. these rapid increases in economic segrega  tion, especially in the context of recent, albeit small, declines in racial seg  regation, have important implications for urban policy, poverty policy, and  the stability of urban communities.  r esidential segregation by race in the  united states has been declining since  about 1970, but the decreases have been so  modest that segregation of african americans  remains high . economic inequal ity has also been increasing since 1979, if not  before . both phenomena have been exten  sively documented. a third dimension of so  cioeconomic differentiation has received  much less attention in recent years economic  segregation . the  relative dearth of studies in this area is sur  prising in light of the importance ascribed to  economic segregation by wilson in his  classic work, the truly disadvantaged.  i document increasing economic segrega  tion in recent decades, particularly for afri  can americans and hispanics in the 1980s.  the phenomenon is widespread, affecting  virtually every metropolitan area in the  united states. i also develop an exploratory  causal model, which suggests that structural  economic transformations and changes in the   social distances among racial groups affect  economic segregation, but do little to account  for the rapid increases in economic segrega  tion among minorities in the 1980s. under direct all correspondence to paul a. jarg  owsky, school of social sciences gr 31, univer  sity of texas at dallas, 2601 n. floyd rd.,  richardson, tx 75080 .  this research was supported by grant 349 u 99  from the institute for research on poverty ,  university of wisconsin madison, in conjunction  with the office of the assistant secretary for  planning and evaluation, u.s. department of  health and human services . i am grateful  for comments on early drafts from kurt beron,  maria cancian, chris desai, george farkas, janet  gamble, robert hauser, don hicks, ron mincy,  steven sandell, wim vijverberg, the participants  in an irp hhs research conference , the asr and three anonymous asr review  ers. reviewers acknowledged by the author are  reynolds farley, douglas s. massey, and daniel  weinberg. ed.  984 american sociological review, 1996, vol. 61  this content downloaded from 198.91.37.2 on wed, 23 dec 2015 13 19 34 utc all use subject to jstor terms and conditionseconomic segregation in u.s. metropolitan areas 985  standing the causes of these changes is a pre  requisite to effective analysis of urban poli  cies and programs.  economic segregation and  assimilation  a rich literature describes the interrelation  ship of racial segregation and economic seg  regation. much of this literature can be traced  to the classic paper by park , who pre  dicted that successful individuals of minor  ity groups move out so that .changes of  economic and social status . .. tend to be reg  istered in changes of location . more  generally, park argued that social relations  are . . . inevitably correlated with spatial rela  tions . . . physical distances . . . are, or seem  to be, the indexes of social distances .  subsequent research has focused on these two  related but conceptually distinct hypotheses  the social distance hypothesis and the as  similation hypothesis . according to the social distance hypoth  esis, racial or ethnic residential segregation  is positively associated with differences be  tween groups . the as  similation hypothesis states that the better off  strata within a minority group will translate  individual gains into spatial assimilation.  as assimilation occurs, racial segregation  will decline for high status minorities rela  tive to low status minorities and, as a result,  economic segregation within the minority  group will increase. erbe , addressing  the issue of socioeconomic segregation by  social class within racial groups, questioned  kantrowitz s finding that the better off  black is as separated from the poorer black  residentially as the better off white is from  the poor white . erbe  argued that kantrowitz s use of the index of  dissimilarity to measure economic seg  regation was conceptually inadequate be  cause the index which measures the even  ness of the spatial distribution of two  groups is insensitive to the relative sizes  of the two groups. she argued that inter  group contact is a function both of resi  dential segregation of populations and their  relative size in the total population .  erbe favored a measure of asym  metric intergroup contact, known as the ex posure index , which gives the average  probability of contact between members of  one group and members of another group.  using census data for chicago, erbe found  that within race indices of dissimilarity for  various measures of social class differed  little between whites and blacks. in contrast,  exposure measures showed that high status  blacks were far more likely to live near low  status blacks than high status whites were to  live near low status whites. erbe concluded  middle class blacks are not randomly distrib  uted throughout the ghetto and thus are segre  gated from the black lower class in this sense.  nevertheless they live in much closer propin  quity with the lower class than do middle class  whites, simply because the black lower class is   proportionally larger than the white lower  class. to the extent that neighborhoods are the  functional locus of many institutions, most es  pecially schools, this is of great consequence.  . .. in particular, it may be one factor in ac  counting for the low degree of occupational in  heritance between high status black fathers and  their sons and the high degree of intergener  ational downward mobility among blacks com  pared to whites.  this quote sounds incongruous today, when  the issue has been turned on its head. wilson   argued that the out migration of the  black middle class has isolated poor blacks  in the inner city, with disturbing concentra  tion effects.  erbe s analysis demonstrated the impor  tance of distinguishing between measures of  economic segregation that are conditioned on  the underlying income distribution ahd those  that are not. each measure has a value, but  the different measures answer different ques  tions. if the incomes of all black households  were to rise in real terms by a fixed amount  and no households moved, the p index mea  suring contact with persons in poverty would  change a great deal because there would be  less black poverty to be exposed to. in con  trast, there should be little if any change in  the index of dissimilarity, since the spatial  distribution of the social strata within the  black community would be unaffected.  farley also examined the interac  tions of residential segregation by race and  social class. as proxies for social class,  farley used the educational attainment of  adult males, the occupations of employed  this content downloaded from 198.91.37.2 on wed, 23 dec 2015 13 19 34 utc all use subject to jstor terms and conditions986 american sociological review  males, and family income. education, for ex  ample, was coded in 10 levels by the bureau  of the census, and for each racial group  farley calculated all possible pair wise indi  ces of dissimilarity among the education lev  els. farley found that residential segregation  by social class, regardless of the proxy vari  able used, was low relative to racial residen  tial segregation. in a more recent study,  white also found that residential  segregation by income, education, or occu  pation is relatively modest, especially in  contrast to segregation by race, which he  called a pervasive feature of the metropoli  tan landscape. moreover, farley found that racial segregation was  nearly constant across levels of education,  ranging from a low of 82 for adult males with  1 to 4 years of education to a high of 89 for  adult males with 4 years of college. the  findings were similar when social class was  proxied by occupation of employed men or  family income. farley concluded that   racial residential segregation ... is not pri  marily a consequence of racial differences in  economic status . in a similar vein,  miller and quigley , using the entropy  measure of residential segregation, con  cluded that only a small fraction . .. of seg  regation by race can be explained by eco  nomic forces leading to a clustering by de  mographic group .  massey , summarizing the large  body of empirical work on. the social dis  tance and assimilation hypotheses, con  cluded that social distance is highly corre  lated with residential dissimilarity between  particular ethnic groups.... in contrast, the  assimilation hypothesis has not received  consistent support . massey attrib  uted some of this lack of support for the as  similation hypothesis to the use of indirect  standardization in much of the research.  he argued that direct standardization is preferable. studies employing the  latter technique, such as farley s study cited  above, tend to support assimilation for his  panics but not for blacks . several conclusions can be drawn from the  empirical literature. first, racial segregation  is far more extensive than segregation by so  cial class. neighborhoods are more hetero  geneous along class lines than they are along  racial lines . second, although social dis  tance is useful in predicting cross sectional  patterns of segregation, the prediction that  residential assimilation follows from eco  nomic advancement has not been supported  for blacks, again highlighting the persistence  of racial segregation. assimilation is sup  ported for hispanics .  finally, racial segregation is not an artifact  of economic segregation the primary orga  nizing principles of the metropolis are race  and ethnicity, not social class. kain  concluded that virtually every systematic  study has concluded that black and white dif  ferences in income and other socioeconomic  variables account for very little of the cur  rent and past patterns of racial segregation  . hence, it makes sense to study eco  nomic segregation within racial and ethnic  groups otherwise, some of the observed eco  nomic segregation will be an artifact of the  underlying racial residence patterns.  measuring economic  segregation  to measure economic segregation, erbe and  most other pre 1987 researchers used the in  dex of dissimilarity applied to variables  which served as proxies for social class, such  as occupation or educational attainment  . for computational purposes,  the variables must be broken down into dis  crete categories. unfortunately, changes in  the social meaning of occupational categories  over time and changes in the relation between  social class and educational attainment com  plicate longitudinal comparisons of economic  segregation based on these variables.  in contrast, household income provides  greater comparability over time once infla  tion is taken into account. massey and  eggers , comparing interclass  segregation using census tract data from  1970 and 1980, defined four social classes  based on specific income thresholds poverty  income, lower middle class, upper middle 1 a score of 100 represents complete segrega  tion. the figures are averages for 29 urban areas.  this content downloaded from 198.91.37.2 on wed, 23 dec 2015 13 19 34 utc all use subject to jstor terms and conditionseconomic segregation in u.s. metropolitan areas 987  class, and affluent. then, for each racial and  ethnic group, they computed the six pair  wise indices of dissimilarity among the four  social classes and averaged these indices to  come up with a final aggregate measure  .2 based on this analysis,  massey and eggers concluded that  interclass segregation among blacks in  creased over the 1970s, often quite sharply  .3 this measure, however, revealed  declines in interclass segregation for whites,  hispanics, and asians.  while ingenious, this method of measur  ing interclass segregation has several prob  lems. first, the cutoff points between income  classes are unavoidably arbitrary. second, in  come is a continuous variable, and collaps  ing it into four categories discards informa  tion. third, and most important, the measure  is not independent of the mean and variance  of the income distribution. as the mean and  variance change, the cutoff points for the in  come categories cut the income distribu  tion at different percentiles. in other words,  like p , the index of dissimilarity used in this  way may confound changes in the underly  ing income distribution with changes in spa  tial organization.  a simulation illustrates the problem. imag  ine a metropolitan area with 100 neighbor  hoods, each containing 100 households, with  a modest degree of economic segregation.  shifts in either the mean or variance of the  income distribution can move households  from one class category to another, even  though they have not moved from one neigh  borhood to another. table 1 shows the effect  of such shifts on the di measure. for a given  value of mean household income, increases  in the standard deviation reduces economic  segregation as measured by di even though  no household has moved and all households  stand in the same relative position in the in  come distribution. increases in household  mean income, holding the standard deviation  constant, increase di although less so at high table 1. simulation of massey and egger s mea  sure of economic segregation by  mean and standard deviation of the in  come distribution.  standard deviation mean  income 10,000 15,000 20,000 25,000   20,000 .57 .49 .44 .41  25,000 .58 .50 .45 .42  30,000 .61 .50 .45 .42  35,000 .67 .52 .47 .43  note one hundred neighborhoods with 100  households each were generated by a random pro  cess in which income is determined by a random  normal deviate and spatial location is determined by  two random normal deviates, one of which is re  tained from the income determination.  income levels. thus, the index of dissimilar  ity applied to the income distribution con  founds changes in the income distribution  with changes in spatial organization.  the major source of this problem is that  the index of dissimilarity is built around the  idea of two well defined groups.4 white   argued that when the number of  groups exceeds two, a weighted average or  pairwise adaptation of the index of dissimi  larity is rather unsatisfactory. moreover,  the high frequency of households changing  categories as their annual income changes,  which could not occur for race or ethnicity,  clouds the interpretation of a segregation sta  tistic based on income categories. more ad  vanced measures, such as the entropy index,  handle multiple categories with ease, but  such measures are still subject to shifts in the  underlying distribution that change the im  plicit meaning of the categories.  the correlation ratio, also referred to as  eta squared or the segregation statistic, has  also been used to measure segregation . while often applied to dichotomous  variables, the correlation ratio is also ca  pable of measuring spatial segregation by  continuous variables like income . farley , for example, ap 2 a simpler but more inexact approach is to cal  culate an index of dissimilarity for the poor and  non poor .  3 it should be noted, however, that massey and  eggers found no evidence that this in  creased economic segregation played a role in the  increased isolation of the black poor as claimed  by wilson and jargowsky . 4 several authors have developed variations of  the index of dissimilarity that can account for  more than two groups, but the groups still must  be finite in number and well defined .  this content downloaded from 198.91.37.2 on wed, 23 dec 2015 13 19 34 utc all use subject to jstor terms and conditions988 american sociological review  plied the correlation ratio to years of educa  tion to get a succinct measure of social  class segregation  each individual in the sample was assigned a  number equaling the years of schooling he had  completed. using these data, we calculated an  estimate of the variance of the educational at  tainment of blacks and whites in the entire ur  banized area. . . . u sing the attainment of  each person in a tract and the tract mean, we  developed a within tract estimate of the vari  ance in attainment. the correlation ratio, some  times referred to as eta squared, equals one mi  nus the within tract variance divided by the es  timate of variance developed from the total  sample. .. . this may be thought of as a one  way analysis of variance model in which the  overall variance in socioeconomic status is di  vided into within census tract and between cen  sus tract variances.  in the case of dichotomous variables, the cor  relation ratio is equivalent to the p measure after standardizing the latter  for the underlying population proportions of  the groups being compared .  however, unlike p , it easily extends to  polytomous variables and for continuous  characteristics like income and education it  is particularly attractive .  conceptually, the application of the corre  lation ratio to income is straightforward. i  define the neighborhood sorting index   as  n  i hn2  n 1  nsi un h   h v  h  where y is household income, i indexes  households, n indexes neighborhoods, hn is  the number of households in neighborhood  n, and h and n are the total number of house  holds and neighborhoods respectively. as in  most segregation research, neighborhoods  are proxied by census tracts.5 the square of  nsi is the between tract variance over the total variance of household income .  this specific implementation of the corre  lation ratio has several desirable properties.  it is a pure measure of economic segrega  tion. it implicitly controls for the overall in  come level because it is based on deviations  from mean household income and also con  trols for income inequality because it is ex  pressed as a percentage of total income vari  ance. in contrast to di and other measures  based on breaking the income distribution  into fixed classes, nsi is invariant with re  spect to changes in the mean and variance of  the income distribution. when the simulation  of table 1 is repeated for nsi, an identical  value appears in each cell.  nsi also has an intuitive interpretation in  terms of the income distribution. each  household in a metropolitan area has an in  come, and the distribution of these incomes  has a mean and a standard deviation. in ad  dition, each household is located in a neigh  borhood. each neighborhood has a mean in  come, and the distribution of households by  the mean income of their neighborhood also  has a mean and a standard deviation. nsi is  simply the ratio of these two standard devia  tions. in the unlikely event that all neighbor  hoods have the same mean income then the stan  dard deviation of the neighborhood distribu  tion is 0 and nsi would be 0 as well. at the  other extreme, if all households live in neigh  borhoods that have mean incomes identical  to their own incomes, than the standard de  viation of the neighborhood distribution will  be identical to the standard deviation of the  household distribution and nsi will be 1.0.  values close to 1.0, therefore, indicate high  levels of economic segregation.  in addition to controlling for shifts in the  underlying income distribution, the nsi has  conceptual advantages as well. stearns and  logan note that dissimilarity indices,  exposure type measures, and variance based  measures reflect different dimen  sions of segregation . in reference  to racial segregation, they conclude  indeed, if we examined our true theoretical in  terest, we might often find that we are more 5 see white for a discussion of the ad  vantages and disadvantages of using census tracts  in research on neighborhoods and segregation.  this content downloaded from 198.91.37.2 on wed, 23 dec 2015 13 19 34 utc all use subject to jstor terms and conditionseconomic segregation in u.s. metropolitan areas 989  table 2. neighborhood sorting index by racial and ethnic group u.s. metropolitan areas  , 1970 to 1990  white black hispanic  mean number mean number mean number  sample and year nsi of msas nsi of msas nsi of msas  all metropolitan areas  1970 .310 228 .341 76 .384 30  1980 .343 318 .395 111 .419 49  1990 .374 336 .480 131 .487 68  constant set of metropolitan areas  1970 .310 228 .341 76 .384 30  1980 .351 228 .397 76 .417 30  1990 .385 228 .481 76 .486 30  note includes metropolitan areas with 10,000 or more households for each racial or ethnic group indi  cated means are weighted by number of households.  centrally concerned with community deveiop  ment processes which lead black neighbor  hoods to greater or lesser racial homogeneity.  for this purpose, the correlation ratio is the  more suitable index.  with respect to economic segregation, we are  interested in precisely those community de  velopment processes that produce greater or  lesser economic homogeneity among neigh  borhoods. zoloth argued that,  like entropy based measures and in contrast  to the index of dissimilarity, the correlation  ratio gives more emphasis to areal units that  differ sharply from the mean. from a policy  perspective, this weighting.is appropriate be  cause often the concern is with the most  highly segregated neighborhoods. on the  other hand, all correlation ratio based mea  sures are essentially aspatial   .  while theoretically straightforward, data  limitations complicate the calculation of the  nsi. while the between tract variance is  easy to estimate , the total variance of household in  come is not published by the bureau of the  census. i use the available counts of house  holds by income category and make some as  sumptions about the distribution of house  holds within income categories. based on  comparisons with public use microdata sample estimates, i assume a linear distribu  tion of households in lower income catego  ries and a pareto distribution for income cat  egories above the metropolitan area mean. i  then take the integral of the appropriate den  sity function times the squared difference  from the mean and evaluate it for each in  come category. summing these squared de  viations and dividing by the total number of  households yields an estimated variance of  household income .  when the number of households for a  given racial group in a given metropolitan  area is too small, it becomes more difficult  to estimate the pareto parameters for the up  per brackets. thus, i calculate the nsi only  for those racial ethnic groups with at least  10,000 households in any given metropolitan  area. future research could overcome this  limitation by working directly with the  household records in the census database, in  which case the variance could be calculated  directly for all metropolitan areas. however,  access to this database is limited due to con  fidentiality concerns.  patterns of economic  segregation 1970 to 1990  previous studies have found relatively low  levels of economic segregation, regardless of  the measures employed . similarly, i find that values of the  this content downloaded from 198.91.37.2 on wed, 23 dec 2015 13 19 34 utc all use subject to jstor terms and conditions990 american sociological review  table 3. neighborhood sorting index the 10 largest metropolitan areas, 1970, 1980, and 1990  metropolitan whites blacks hispanics  area 1970 1980 1990 1970 1980 1990 1970 1980 1990  new york .30 .38 .49 .34 .43 .46 .36 .47 .57  los angeles .49 .42 .48 .37 .44 .52 .42 .43 .46  chicago .31 .38 .40 .37 .41 .48 .43 .44 .52  philadelphia .31 .39 .40 .35 .41 .48 .69 .81  detroit .39 .46 .49 .37 .41 .55 .47 .62 .83  dallas .30 .38 .41 .31 .43 .51 .44 .44 .55  washington, d.c. .38 .44 .42 .38 .45 .47 .52 .74 .55  san francisco .38 .39 .41 .43 .50 .51 .42 .48 .48  houston .33 .42 .41 .27 .40 .52 .48 .41 .51  boston .30 .37 .33 .40 .40 .51 .57 .53  neighborhood sorting index are relatively  modest, though increasing. table 2 shows the  weighted mean nsi for whites, blacks, and  hispanics.6 figures in the upper panel are for  all metropolitan areas in the united states  that had at least 10,000 households for that  group in that year the lower panel shows the  weighted means for a constant set of metro  politan areas. the 1990 nsi for whites is  .374 . thus, between  neighborhood variance accounts for about 14  percent of the total variance  in household income.  despite the low levels, however, the results  show a pronounced trend toward increasing  economic segregation. looking at the upper  panel, the increases are largest for blacks  the nsi increased more than 40 percent be  tween 1970 and 1990 from .341 to .480.  most of this increase was in the 1980s. for whites, the nsi increased by about 10 per  cent in both the 1970s and 1980s.7 for his  panics, the nsi increased by about 9 percent  in the 1970s and by 16 percent in the 1980s.  these findings are not driven by the inclu  sion of more metropolitan areas in the later  years indices for a constant set of metro  politan areas show a virtually  identical pattern of results. although the re  sults are weighted by the number of house  holds in each racial ethnic group, the trends  are not driven by a few large cities averages  computed for small, medium, and large met  ropolitan areas showed similar  trends .  the trend toward greater economic segre  gation was remarkably widespread. in the  1980s, 108 out of the 111 met  ropolitan areas for which i calculate a change  in nsi had an increase in nsi among blacks.  for whites, the nsi increased in 253 out of  318 metropolitan areas for  hispanics, the nsi increased in 39 out of 49  . values for the 10 largest met  ropolitan areas, presented in table 3, show a  fairly consistent pattern of increases. in new  york, economic segregation increased most  rapidly in the 1970s in los angeles, eco  nomic segregation increased most in the  1980s. for whites, a few metropolitan areas  had decreased economic segregation los  angeles in the 1970s the district of colum 6 the indices for hispanics for 1970 are based  on the spanish american category used by the  bureau of the census. bean and tienda have reviewed the shifting definitions and  procedures employed by the bureau to count the  hispanic population. because of the these chan  ges, the hispanic indices from 1970 are not  strictly comparable to later years. also note that  the counts of whites, blacks, and hispanics by  income category used in this analysis are not  unduplicated. that is, the white and black fig  ures include some hispanics, who may be of any  race. 7 the nsi for the total population follows the same pattern as the indi  ces for whites, although at slightly higher levels.  this content downloaded from 198.91.37.2 on wed, 23 dec 2015 13 19 34 utc all use subject to jstor terms and conditionseconomic segregation in u.s. metropolitan areas 991  bia, houston, and boston in the 1980s. for  blacks, no metropolitan area had a signifi  cant decline in economic segregation in ei  ther decade.  these findings differ substantially from  past research. massey and eggers  found increased economic segregation for  blacks in the 1970s, but not for whites,  asians, or hispanics, based on data from 60  metropolitan areas. white , calcu  lating the entropy index for several variables  for 19 metropolitan areas, found that segre  gation change by socioeconomic status is  mixed in the 1970s. white also noted that  segregation of the poor from the nonpoor in  creased and concluded that segregation of  the poorest, least educated, and least mobile  segments of the population has become more  pronounced . on the other hand, the  entropy index for income showed a decrease in the 1970s . the differences between  prior results and those presented here may  stem from shifts in the underlying income  distribution, as discussed above. another pos  sibility is that the correlation ratio places  greater emphasis on changes in more segre  gated neighborhoods. schnare , for  example, compared changes in racial segre  gation over the 1960s using the correlation  ratio and the index of dissimilarity and found  substantial differences.  some researchers have found evidence of  increasing economic segregation. the figures  in table 2 are consistent with those of  abramson and tobin , who found in  creases in the index of dissimilarity compar  ing the poor and the nonpoor in the 1970s  and 1980s. unfortunately, their findings are  not reported separately by race. massey and  eggers found that most cities had in  creases in overall economic segregation be  tween 1970 and 1980. in earlier work,  massey and eggers showed declines  in economic segregation for all groups except  blacks, but there is no real conflict in these  findings the overall level of economic seg  regation is determined by a complex interac  tion of economic segregation within racial  groups, the degree of racial segregation, and  the relative economic status of the subgroups.  in summary, there was a nearly ubiquitous  trend toward increased economic segregation  as measured by the neighborhood sorting index. for whites, the increases were mod  est but consistent over time. for blacks and  hispanics, increases were modest in the  1970s but much larger on average in the  1980s. these rapid increases in economic  segregation, especially among blacks, have  been implicated in the increasing concentra  tion of poverty . against a backdrop of modest de  creases in racial segregation , these trends suggest a re  consideration of the importance of economic  segregation. to understand whether eco  nomic segregation will continue to increase,  a better understanding is needed of the pro  cess driving the current changes.  economic segregation  an exploratory causal model  i developed an exploratory causal model to  explain the changes in economic segregation  from 1970 to 1990. according to the standard  tenets of urban ecology, the distribution of  households within a metropolitan space is  conditioned by variations among three eas  ily identifiable factors economic status,  family status, and ethnic classifications  . in particular, economic  segregation is the outcome of a cyclical inter  action between the labor market and the hous  ing market. the labor market largely shapes  the income distribution and the overall extent  of income inequality, both across and within  racial and ethnic groups. while the labor mar  ket generates income inequality, the housing  market is the arena in which the spatial distri  bution of that inequality is determined. as  park argued, individuals of high so  cial status try to convert social distances into  physical distances, producing segregation  along racial, ethnic, cultural, and socioeco  nomic lines. finally, the resulting residential  patterns can in turn have independent effects  on the income distribution .  while it is beyond the scope of this analy  sis to fully model the dynamics of the labor  and housing markets and their interactions,  the models presented below test two sets of  hypotheses. first, have structural economic  transformations affected economic segrega  this content downloaded from 198.91.37.2 on wed, 23 dec 2015 13 19 34 utc all use subject to jstor terms and conditions992 american sociological review  tion second, have changes in social dis  tance, both among and within racial groups,  contributed to the observed increases in eco  nomic segregation in testing these hypoth  eses, account must be taken of idiosyncratic  features of metropolitan areas such as  physical configuration, room for expansion,  accumulated housing stock, and historical  ownership patterns that may influence eco  nomic segregation. thus, i employ a re  duced form, fixed effects model. first, i cal  culate the metropolitan level changes in nsi  for both blacks and whites in the 1970s and  1980s.8 the four resulting sets of changes in  nsi are pooled and regressed against a set  of dummy variables for race, decade, and  their interaction. following the standard  path analytic paradigm , vectors of variables are added sequen  tially these vectors include measures of met  ropolitan context, structural economic trans  formations, and social distance. thus, the  basic model is  ansimrd f,  where nsi is the neighborhood sorting in  dex, m indexes metropolitan areas, r indexes  race , and d.indexes decade  .9 the specific  variables included in each vector, the hypoth  eses they test, and the expected signs of the  coefficients are discussed below. given the  dissimilar conditions for blacks and whites  in the united states, i have allowed for sepa  rate slopes by estimating regressions with in  teraction terms between the dummy variable for race and the key economic and social dis  tance variables. these terms are retained and  reported when they increase the explanatory  power of the model.  metropolitan context  many features of metropolitan labor and  housing markets can affect the extent to  which high and low income individuals are  segregated from other members of their own  race. for example, each metropolitan area  has a particular set of institutional arrange  ments and information networks. to the ex  tent that such features are invariant within a  given metropolitan area between 1970 and  1990, the fixed effects structure of the model  implicitly controls for them. other features  may be correlated with region, hence a set of  dummy variables for census division is in  cluded.  large metropolitan areas encompass  greater differentiation of neighborhoods than  do small metropolitan areas , so the log of total population  measured at the beginning of the decade  should have a positive effect on economic  segregation. a rapid influx of new house  holds puts pressure on the housing market  and, in the short run at least, should reduce  economic segregation. 10 one migration vari  able included is the proportion of metropoli  tan area residents age five or older who lived  outside the metropolitan area five years be  fore the base year of the decade . the relative change in total popu  lation over the decade is also included. nega  tive coefficients are expected for both of  these variables. in contrast, a high rate of in  ternal turnover in the housing market may  advance the ecological process and increase  economic segregation. the proportion of  metropolitan area residents who moved within the metro  politan area in the previous five years cap  tures this effect. the overall mean household  income at the beginning of the decade is in  cluded in quadratic form. 8 hispanics are omitted from consideration ow  ing to data limitations.  9 technically, this dependent variable violates  gauss markov assumptions because it is re  stricted to be between 1.00 and 1.00. i rescaled  the variable to range between 0 and 1 and re  peated all regressions after performing the stan  dard logit transformation. the transformation had  virtually no effect on the relative sizes of the co  efficients or their statistical significance. i present  the untransformed regressions here because the  coefficients are easier to interpret. 10 this is a disequilibrium condition. in the  long run, the increased demand in the housing  market could lead to new construction, which  could create greater opportunities for the rich to  reside apart from the poor .  this content downloaded from 198.91.37.2 on wed, 23 dec 2015 13 19 34 utc all use subject to jstor terms and conditionseconomic segregation in u.s. metropolitan areas 993  structural economic transformations  the economic restructuring that affects other  aspects of urban spatial structure may also affect  economic segregation within race groups. a  smaller share of jobs in manufacturing,  greater dispersion of jobs away from the ur  ban core, and an increasing share of jobs in  the managerial or professional occupations  may increase income inequality. these fac  tors may also affect economic segregation by  drawing skilled blacks away from traditional  minority enclaves to jobs in dispersed loca  tions. specifically, decreases in the propor  tion of jobs in manufacturing should increase  economic segregation as new firms locate in  a more dispersed pattern with concurrent ad  justments in the residence patterns of em  ployees. thus, the expected sign on this vari  able is negative. increasing skill require  ments, reflected in the change in the propor  tion of jobs in professional and managerial  occupations, could accentuate social class  differences within racial groups, decrease  group cohesion, and increase economic seg  regation within the black and white commu  nities . hence, the expected  sign for the change in the proportion of jobs  in professional and managerial occupations  is positive.  changes in social distance  the literature on racial segregation generally  supports the hypothesis that social distance  between groups is translated into physical  distance . what is less clear is  how the social distance between racial and  ethnic groups affects the economic segrega  tion within those groups. a plausible hypoth  esis is that greater social distance between  groups constricts the housing options avail  able to all members of the lower status  group guilt by association and leads to  lower economic segregation within the  group. thus, the expected sign for the change  in the ratio of the group s mean household  income to the overall mean household in  come is positive.  decreases in racial segregation, whether  spurred by changes in social distance, public  policy, or other causes, should increase eco nomic segregation as the artificial boundaries  limiting housing options are removed. thus,  a negative sign is expected on the change in  racial segregation, as measured by the index  of dissimilarity. with respect to the 1970s,  massey and eggers found that in  creasing economic inequality provided the  impetus for a broader increase in the degree  of residential segregation between income  groups . their finding concerned  overall economic segregation, but the same  argument applies to economic segregation  within racial groups. two measures of social  distance within groups are included in the  model to test this effect the change in the  group s poverty ratell and the change in the  proportion of families headed by a female.  increases in either variable could encourage  more privileged group members to isolate  themselves, so a positive sign is expected for  both variables.  data  the data are drawn from a variety of sources.  census tract level data, used to compute ra  cial and economic segregation measures,  come from the 1970 fourth count file a,  1980 summary tape file 4a, and 1990 sum  mary tape file 3a . the  1980 data were adjusted to correct for the ef  fects of complementary suppression . metro  politan level variables were taken from the   c versions of these files. to the extent pos  sible, i have adjusted for changes in metro  politan boundaries, which were extensive  .  results  table 4 presents the weighted regression re  sults. 2 model 1 includes only the dummy  variables for race and decade, and their in  teraction. thus, the constant in this regres  ii.the poverty rate is defined as the proportion  of the members of a group living in families or  households with income below the applicable  federal poverty threshold.  12 to deal with heteroskedasticity associated  with size of the metropolitan area, regressions are  weighted by the square root of the number of  households entering into the calculation of the  dependent variable .  this content downloaded from 198.91.37.2 on wed, 23 dec 2015 13 19 34 utc all use subject to jstor terms and conditions994 american sociological review  sion represents the component of the change  in economic segregation common to whites  and blacks in both decades an increase of  3.6 percentage points. in this simple model,  there was no significant difference between  blacks and whites until the 1980s, when the  economic segregation among blacks in  creased by 5.4 percentage points over and  above the common increase. these findings  parallel those in table 2.  model 2 adds variables to account for the  geographic and spatial context of the metro  politan area. a set of dummy variables for  census division captures features of metropolitan area  housing markets and economic structure that  vary by region.13 most are significant and  positive compared to the pacific division,  the remaining divisions had increases in eco  nomic segregation that were 2 to 3 percent  age points higher. the highest coefficients  appeared for the mountain division and the  east midwest division, the so called rust  belt. as expected, cities with high propor  tions or residents moving into the area had  smaller increases in the nsi. the proportion  of residents moving within the metropolitan  area, however, was not statistically signifi  cant in any of the models. the metropolitan  area s average household income, measured  in the base year, also affected the change in  economic segregation over the decade, but in  a nonlinear fashion.14  interestingly, the introduction of these  variables has little impact on the level or sig  nificance of the three dummy variables in  cluded in model 1. the spatial and geo  graphic context does not explain the dramatic  increases in economic segregation among  blacks in the 1980s relative to whites and  blacks in the 1970s.  model 3 introduces several proxies for  structural economic transformations. slopes  are allowed to vary by race. the effect of the  percent change in mean income over the de cade, unlike the level of mean income, does  not have a significant effect on economic seg  regation. however, the change in the share of  jobs in manufacturing has a significant effect  in the expected direction declines in the  manufacturing sector, which were the norm,  are associated with increases in economic  segregation, even after controlling for the  metropolitan area s mean income level at the  beginning of the decade and the percent  change in mean income over the decade.  increasing skill requirements, proxied by  the change in the share of jobs in profes  sional or managerial occupations, reduce  economic segregation. this finding is con  trary to my expectation that an increasing  share of such jobs would emphasize class  distinctions and encourage segregation along  class lines, and therefore increase economic  segregation. one possible explanation for the  unexpected sign on the coefficient is that the  increase in managerial and professional jobs  leads to an increase in economic inequality.  since jobs and annual income probably  change faster than do residential patterns, the  negative coefficient may reflect a disequil  ibrium condition. if the overall variance in  the distribution of household income changes  faster than persons can change neighbor  hoods to reflect their new status, the be  tween neighborhood proportion of that vari  ance may temporarily dip.  for all three economic variables, the esti  mated slopes were more negative for blacks  than for whites, as indicated by the interac  tions of these variables with race . for changes in mean income and  manufacturing, however, the differences be  tween the slopes for blacks and whites were  not statistically significant. however, eco  nomic segregation among blacks is more re  sponsive to changes in skill requirements than  for whites, as indicated by the significant co  efficient on the interaction between dummy  variable for race and the professional and  managerial jobs variable.  the coefficient for the dummy variable  for race remains nonsignificant after the in  troduction of variables for structural eco  nomic transformations. the coefficient on  the dummy variable for the 1980s, equal to  about 0 in models 1 and 2, increases to .027  and becomes statistically significant. be  cause the total effect was close to 0, the in 13 metropolitan areas that span several census  divisions were coded to the division that con  tained the largest share of the area s total popula  tion.  14 the point of inflection is about 32,000 in  all the models. for metropolitan mean income  less than this, income is negatively related to the  change in economic segregation for income lev  els above this point, they are positively related.  this content downloaded from 198.91.37.2 on wed, 23 dec 2015 13 19 34 utc all use subject to jstor terms and conditionseconomic segregation in u.s. metropolitan areas 995  table 4. changes in the neighborhood sorting index pooled regression results, u.s. metropolitan  areas, 1970 1980 and 1980 1990  model 1 model 2 model 3 model 4  constant .036 .128 .158 .188  race .011 .008 .025 .060  decade .000 .027 .024  0 1970 1980  race x decade .052 .127 .160  1980 1990  metropolitan context  new england division .018 .020 .023  mid atlantic division .017 .018 .023  east midwest division .024 .020 .024  west midwest division .021 .024 .029  south atlantic division .015 .013 .021  south central division .020 .018 .026  southwest division .019 .016 .017  mountain division .031 .028 .031  total population .004 .007 .005  recent in migration 13 .074 .092  internal housing turnover .010 .011 .028  mean household income .009 .014 .016  2 .141 .218 .232  1,000  population growth .005 .029 .035    structural economic transformations  mean income .043 .026  manufacturing share .225 .213  professional managerial 125 .124    race x mean income .016 .063  race x manufacturing share .253 .175  race x professional .325 .354  managerial  social distance  mean income ratio .362  racial segregation .022  group poverty rate .338  female headed families .313  r 2 .106 .187 .236 .252  adjusted r2 .102 .168 .212 .224  n 732 732 732 732  note numbers in parentheses are absolute values of t statistics for hj f 0.  a omitted regional category is pacific division.   p .05 .01 .001  this content downloaded from 198.91.37.2 on wed, 23 dec 2015 13 19 34 utc all use subject to jstor terms and conditions996 american sociological review  direct effect for the 1980s through structural  economic transformations is therefore about   .027. in other words, economic segregation  would have increased even more rapidly if  the economic transformation variables had  been constant over the 1980s. similarly, the  interaction of the race and decade variables,  which measures the extra increase in eco  nomic segregation for blacks in the 1980s,  increases sharply from .052 to .127.  finally, model 4 adds proxies for changes  in social distance between groups and within  groups. the coefficient for the change in the  group s mean income relative to the metro  politan area s mean income is significant and  in the expected direction improvement in  the relative social status of the group in  creases economic segregation. the coeffi  cient for changes in racial segregation has the  expected sign, but is not significant.  changes in the group s poverty rate and  the percentage of families headed by females  are the only variables in the model that re  flect within group differences. both have the  expected sign , but only the poverty  rate coefficient is statistically significant. in  creased poverty within the group thus in  creases spatial segregation, supporting the  hypothesis of middle class flight . massey and eggers  also found that increased poverty produced  increases in economic segregation.  because it would not be surprising if the  effects of the social distance measures dif  fered for whites and blacks, i estimated a  regression in which the social distance coef  ficients were allowed to vary by interacting  those variables with the dummy variable for  race. however, none of the coefficients for  these interaction terms was significant, and  their inclusion caused virtually no changes in  the size or significance of the other coeffi  cients in the regression . an f test failed to reject the restric  tion of equal slopes for the social distance  variables.  the social distance measures also fail to  explain why the 1980s were different, espe  cially for blacks. the coefficient for the  dummy variable for the 1980s decreased only  slightly in model 4, to .024. after including  the social distance proxies, the coefficient on  the interaction of the dummy variables for  race and decade increased, yet again, to .16. at the same time, the dummy variable for  race, not significant in the previous regres  sions, becomes negative and significant. con  trolling for the other variables in the model  4, blacks had smaller increases in economic  segregation than did whites in the 1970s, but  much larger increases in the 1980s.  the dummy variables, of course, are  merely proxies for unknown factors in the  process of generating economic segregation  that particularly affect one group. if all rel  evant variables were included in a correctly  specified model, the coefficient on these  dummy variables should be reduced to 0 be  cause the actual process driving economic  segregation would be understood. in prac  tice, however, the persistence of nonzero co  efficients on variables indicating member  ship in a particular group indicates a failure  to generate adequate multivariate explana  tions of social processes from measurements  on individuals . put a differ  ent way, i hoped to explain the large in  creases in economic segregation among mi  norities in the 1980s by considering the eco  nomic and social variables driving these  changes. instead, the mystery has deepened  as the gap to be explained has widened.  conclusion  in the spatial and economic organization of  metropolitan areas, households are sorted  along a number of important dimensions   the spatial segregation of racial and eth  nic groups from each other, usually mea  sured by the index of dissimilarity   economic inequality, either overall or  within racial groups, which is nonspat  ial   the spatial segregation of social and  economic groups from each other   the spatial segregation of racial groups  from one another, after controlling for  income or social class, which measures  the degree to which spatial assimilation  follows from economic assimilation     the spatial segregation of economic  groups from one another, controlling for  this content downloaded from 198.91.37.2 on wed, 23 dec 2015 13 19 34 utc all use subject to jstor terms and conditionseconomic segregation in u.s. metropolitan areas 997  racial group , which bears on such issues  as the flight of black middle class pro  posed by wilson, and which is measured  by massey and eggers s measure  of interclass segregation , the neigh  borhood sorting index , and simi  lar measures.  i have primarily addressed the last of these  five dimensions economic segregation  within racial and ethnic groups. the nsi  measure i have proposed, which is closely  related to the correlation ratio used in previ  ous studies, is an appropriate measure for  studying economic segregation. unlike the  index of dissimilarity, it is well suited for use  with a continuous variable like income. the  nsi is a pure measure of the degree.of res  idential segregation of households of differ  ent income levels, after controlling for the  mean level of income and the total amount of  income inequality. unlike the index of dis  similarity when applied to several income  classes , the nsi is  not sensitive to changes in the parameters of  the income distribution, only to movements  of households from one neighborhood to an  other.  the nsi reveals a steady trend toward in  creasing economic segregation. for blacks  and hispanics, however, the increase in eco  nomic segregation was particularly acute in  the 1980s. increases in economic segregation  were widespread, with few metropolitan ar  eas bucking the trend. given the tremendous  variation among metropolitan areas in their  economies, housing market characteristics,  poverty trends, and so on, the prevalence of  these changes suggests that a fundamental  and important process is under way. an un  derstanding of the future of america s cities  requires a better understanding of the mecha  nisms driving economic segregation.  paul a. jargowsky is assistant professor of po  litical economy at the university of texas at dal  las. he received his ph.d. in public policy from  harvard university in 1991. his research focuses  on urban poverty and economic segregation. he  is the author of poverty and place ghettos, bar  rios, and the american city , a comprehensive study, of neigh  borhood poverty in the united states. references