income segregation and local progressive taxation  empirical evidence from switzerland kurt schmidheiny department of economics, tufts university, united states cesifo, munich, germany received 30 july 2004 received in revised form 9 september 2005 accepted 12 september 2005 available online 2 november 2005 abstract this study investigates spatial income segregation in fiscally decentralized urban areas. the theoretical part proposes the progressivity of local income taxes as a new theoretical explanation for income segregation. the empirical part studies how income tax differentials across municipalities affect the households locationdecisions. i use data from the swiss metropolitan area of basel that contains tax information on all moving households in 1997. the location choice of the households is investigated within the framework of the random utility maximization model. different econometric specifications of the error term structure, such asconditional logit, nested logit and multinomial probit, are compared. the empirical results show that rich households are significantly and substantially more likely to move to low tax municipalities than poor households. this result holds after controlling for alternative explanations of segregation. social interactionsand distance from the central business district are established as other major factors for income segregation.
households in general tend to choose locations close to other households like themselves.
d2005 elsevier b.v . all rights reserved.
jel classification h71 h73 r20 r23 keywords location choice segregation fiscal federalism progressive taxation discrete choice social interactions 1. introduction bto secure an efficient outcome, the provision of public services should be determined and paid for by those who benefit q, as musgrave pointedly remarks. oates also argued that local units deciding upon public programs are more likely to trade off costs against benefits if these programs are financed by local taxes.
0047 2727 see front matter d2005 elsevier b.v . all rights reserved.
doi 10.1016 j.jpubeco.2005.09.003e mail address kurt.schmidheiny tufts.edu.journal of public economics 90 429 458 www.elsevier.com locate econbasewhile the virtues of decentralized financial responsibility are uncontested, the resulting tax differentials are highly disputed. tax differentials are often seen as consequences of differentpreferences for the locally provided public goods. however, different tax rates can also be theresult of different economic resources of the local population, since rich local jurisdictions canraise the same revenue with lower tax rates than poor ones. while the effect of the tax base ontax rates is trivial, the opposite effect is less evident. this paper addresses the question whether tax differentials across local jurisdictions is not just the consequence, but also the cause of differences in local average income.
the theoretical part of this paper proposes the progressivity of a local income tax as a new theoretical explanation for income segregation of the population. the empirical part studies thecommunity choice of households in switzerland. swiss metropolitan areas are a laboratory forfederal systems as they are divided into a multitude of municipalities with extensive political andfiscal autonomy. moreover, the main local tax is on income rather than on property. the estimatedmultinomial response models show that rich households are significantly and substantially more likely to move to low tax municipalities than poor households. this result holds after controlling for alternative explanations of segregation. social interactions and distance from the centralbusiness district are established as other major factors for income segregation.
the theoretical literature on the local provision of local public goods goes back to tiebout  . tiebout showed that fiscal decentralization leads to an efficient provision of local public goods because people with similar preferences would settle in particular municipalities and votefor their desired level of public goods provision. tiebout s result rests on the assumption thathouseholds have equal incomes. the location of households and the local provision of public goods when households differ in incomes were studied by ellickson ,westhoff  and in the literature surveyed in ross and yinger .
thesegregation hypothesis is one of the central propositions in multi community models in the tradition of tiebout. endogenous segregation means that different people choose different locationsin equilibrium. while the tiebout model focuses on preference heterogeneity, ellickson andwesthoff turned their attention to income as the main dimension of difference. several mechanismshave been proposed to explain why rich households make different choices than poor households. the nature of the local public good, ranging from a monetary transfer to a nonsubstitutable pure public good, induces a self sorting of the population when rich households esteempublic goods relatively more than poor households. another mechanism draws on the incomeelasticity of housing if housing expenditures become relatively less important with increasingincome, rich households are less concerned about high housing prices than poor households.
the segregation mechanism in this paper builds on the empirical fact that most income tax schedules are progressive and that local jurisdictions can often only set the tax level within agiven federal tax schedule. the high priority of tax rates in rich households decisions is explained by the progressivity of the tax schedule.
the segregation hypothesis of tiebout type models has been challenged by a series of empirical studies.
1a first strand of research investigates the equilibrium predictions of multicommunity models using data on aggregate community characteristics. epple and sieg  1the early empirical literature on multi community models investigated the relationship between tax differentials, public good provision and housing prices. oates and a multitude of subsequent studies strikingly confirm the so called capitalization hypothesis, which predicts that low taxes and attractive public goods provision should be reflected in high housing prices.k. schmidheiny journal of public economics 90 429 458 430andepple et al. develop a strategy for estimating the household preference parameters in an equilibrium model where the local income distribution and local policy variables aresimultaneously determined. they show that the differing income quantiles across 92 localjurisdictions in the boston area are well explained by the model predictions. feld and kirchga ssner regress the share of various income classes in swiss cantons and main cities on income tax rates. they find a strong negative relationship between the tax rate and the share of rich households. however, their treatment of the generic endogeneity of tax rates by instrumental variables from mainly lagged observations may not be sufficient to solve theendogeneity problem, as the general equilibrium of tax rates and income segregation is mostlikely a long run phenomenon. rhode and strumpf assess the importance of the segregation mechanism in tiebout type models from a historical perspective. they collected animpressive data set with measures of heterogeneity in the population over a period of 140 years.given that the costs of moving dramatically declined during this time, multi community modelspredict that the population within local units should have become more homogeneous while the differences across local units should have aggravated. they conclude that their data do not support the model predictions on a national scale. for metropolitan areas, however, the observedpattern does not contradict the segregation hypothesis.
the second empirical approach also used in this paper directly targets the location choice of individual households using a multinomial response framework. this approachcircumvents the endogeneity problem because, from the perspective of a single household,the community characteristics can be taken as given. friedman used a conditional logit model to study the location choice of 682 households among nine residential areas in the san francisco area. nechyba and strauss use the same model to study the choice of over 22,000 households among six school districts in the suburbs of philadelphia.both studies show that public expenditures are an important locational factor. thesegregation hypothesis needs explicit consideration as household specific variables are notidentified in linear conditional logit models . in need of a variable thatdepends on both household and community characteristics, nechyba and strauss calculate thehouseholds hypothetical consumption of private goods for all school districts. this variabledepends on after tax local housing prices assuming that households consume the same amount of housing in all school districts. they therefore implicitly assume that the price elasticity of housing is zero.
2 bayer et al. attempt a combination of the two empirical approaches. following berry et al. , they first estimate the households choice of a neighborhood, using neighborhood fixed effects and a multitude of interaction effects between household and neighborhoodcharacteristics. in a second step they explain the neighborhood fixed effects by neighborhoodcharacteristics using instrumental variables which make use of an explicit general equilibriummodel. the predictions of the estimated model therefore adequately take into consideration the  adjustment of the endogenous aggregate neighborhood characteristics.
this study follows friedman andnechyba and strauss but shifts the focus to assessing the segregation hypothesis. the general locational attractiveness of acommunity is considered in community specific constants. this is equivalent to the first stageestimation in bayer et al. . the specification of the model is drawn on an explicit 2the assumption is relaxed by using community specific coefficients for household income. alternative specific coefficients, however, cannot be derived from a random utility framework.k. schmidheiny journal of public economics 90 429 458 431theoretical multi community model.
the paper is organized as follows section 2 describes fiscal decentralization in switzerland.
a theoretical model of location choice based on progressive income taxation is proposed insection 3 . alternative explanations of income segregation are discussed in section 4 . the econometric model is outlined in section 5 , while section 6 describes the data. the empirical results are presented in section 7 .section 8 draws conclusions.
2. fiscal decentralization and progressive taxation in switzerland  switzerland is an exemplary federal fiscal system. the swiss federation comprises 26 states, the so called cantons. the cantons are divided into roughly 3000 municipalities of varying sizeand population. all three state levels finance their expenditures essentially by their own taxesand fees. the total tax revenue of all three levels was 77 billion chf in 1997, of which 45 isimposed by the federation, 32 by the cantons and 23 by the municipalities.
3while the federal government is mainly financed by indirect taxes such as the vat, the cantons and municipalities largely rely on direct taxes. income taxes account for 65 of cantonal and 73 of municipal tax revenue. in total, 45 of the income tax revenue go to thecantons, 37 to the municipalities and only 18 to the federal government. transfers betweenthe three levels are not a major part of the budgets of cantons andmunicipalities .
the cantons organize their tax systems autonomously. for example, they decide upon the level of income and corporate taxes and the degree of tax progression. the individual municipalities in turn can generally set a tax shifter for income and corporate taxes. the municipal tax is then the cantonal tax rate multiplied by the municipal tax shifter. in somecantons, for example in the canton of basel stadt before 2001, the individual municipalitiesalso have some freedom in setting the tax schedule. the decisions in the cantons andmunicipalities are made by the legislative body and are subject to referendums. federal andcantonal systems of fiscal equalization limit the tax differences across cantons and acrossmunicipalities within the same canton to some extent, but still leave room for considerablevariation.
the above outlined federal system leads to ample differences of average income taxes across swiss municipalities. for example, for a two child family with a gross income of 60,000 swissfrancs the sum of cantonal and municipal average income tax ranged from 2.3 in baarin the canton of zug to 8.2 in lauterbrunnen in the canton of bern in the year 1997 . the federal income tax for this household was 0.7 . with anincome of 500,000 chf a two child family faced much higher average tax rates due to theprogressive federal and cantonal tax schedules, namely ranging from 10.9 in wollerau in thecanton of schwyz to 28.7 in onex in the canton of geneva. the federal average income tax for this household was 9.4 .
the tax differences across municipalities within metropolitan areas are also substantial.
fig. 1 shows characteristics of the municipalities in the metropolitan area of basel, 4the third largest swiss metropolitan area. the basel area depicted in fig. 1 had 340,000 inhabitants 3all figures in this paragraph apply to 1997. source eidgeno ssisches finanzdepartement , o ffentliche finanzen 1999 bund, kantone, gemeinden.
4see definition of the area in section 6 and data sources in the appendix .k. schmidheiny journal of public economics 90 429 458 432in 1997. the city of basel with 172,000 inhabitants includes the central business district of the area. the area comprises municipalities from three cantons basel stadt, basel land, andsolothurn. there is great variability in both tax levels and tax schedules. the totalledmunicipal and cantonal average income tax rate for a two child family with an annual income of chf 60,000 is depicted in the top left map in fig. 1 . the taxes are highest in the city of basel and up to 41 lower in the municipalities around the center. arich household with an income of chf 500,000 faces a similar spatial pattern of taxes , but much higher average tax rates due to the steep progressivity of incometaxes.
it is particularly interesting to contrast the local tax rates with the income of the residents. the bottom left map in fig. 1 shows the local share of households with incomes above 75,000 chf. the map shows a quasi inverted picture of the tax rates.
the high tax center municipality has the lowest proportion of rich households, whereas the low tax municipalities are populated by comparatively more rich households. therental prices for housing are also correlated with the tax rates. thelow tax fringe of municipalities around the center exhibit higher average prices than thecenter.
while local taxation of property is widespread, local taxation of income is rarer. local income taxation at the municipal level is for example observed in four u.s. states and in denmark. these states and countries apply a flat local tax. belgium is to my knowledge the only other country besidesincome tax rate, 2 children, chf 60 000 income tax rate, 2 children, chf 500 000 3.7 3.8 4.7 4.8 4.9 5.0 5.1 5.2 5.5 5.6 6.220.9 21.0 21.1 22.0 22.1 23.0 23.1 24.0 24.1 25.0 25.1 26.0 26.1 27.0 households with income above chf 75 000 rental price for housing, chf per m2 0.24 0.25 0.26 0.30 0.31 0.35 0.36 0.40 0.41 0.45 0.46 0.50190 195 196 200 201 205 206 210 211 215 216 220 221 225 226 230 fig. 1. characteristics of municipalities in the metropolitan area of basel.k. schmidheiny journal of public economics 90 429 458 433switzerland with progressive tax schemes at the municipal level. canada had a similar system at the provincial level between 1977 and 1996  when personal income taxes in canadian provinces were a percentage of the progressivefederal tax.
3. a model of location choice and local progressive income taxation the theoretical model describes a metropolitan area with a fixed number jof distinct local jurisdictions, called communities. the political borders of the communities are theoutcome of a historical process and thus taken as given. the area is populated by acontinuum of heterogeneous households, which differ in incomes. income is distributedaccording to a distribution function fn0 with support  y,y ,yn0,y bl. there are three goods in the economy private consumption b, housing hand a public good g.
this model is close to epple and romer but with income rather than property taxes.
each community jspends the amount njgto provide the local good g, where njis the measure of households living in community j. the communities levy income taxes to finance the local good. in each community j, the tax rate consists of two parts, a local tax shifter tjn0 and a progressive tax rate structure r. i assume r is continuous in y, rn0, the average tax rate tdra 0,1 and the marginal tax rate t r yrv a 0,1 .
the tax rate structure r is exogenous and identical across communities.
i assume that the local good gis fixed and identical across communities. the local good gis therefore locally provided, locally financed but centrally decided upon. there are two reasons for assuming exogeneity of the local good first, many locally financed goods,particularly in switzerland, satisfy this description. schooling, for example, accounts for thelargest item in municipal budgets in switzerland local neighborhood schools are locallyprovided and locally financed. cantonal regulations, however, leave little discretion forfinancially relevant decisions.
5second, the aim of this paper is to study the progressivity of income taxes as a source of income segregation in switzerland. however, the model would become intractable allowing for both progressive taxation and endogenous provision of local goods.6 in each community j, the tax shifter tjis determined by budget balance. the price for housing pjin community jis established on a competitive housing market. hence, the communities are fully characterised by their local income tax level and their local price for housing. a householdcan move costlessly and chooses the community which maximizes its utility as place ofresidence.
5in particular, teachers salaries and class size are regulated by cantonal law. furthermore, cantonal courts ruled, based on equity considerations, that schools are not allowed to provide additional tutoring or extra classes for extraordinary strong or weak pupils.
6schmidheiny studies endogenous local goods which are determined through municipal majority votes, but financed by flatlocal income taxes. this model exhibits very similar equilibrium properties as the one presented here.k. schmidheiny journal of public economics 90 429 458 4343.1. household preferences the preferences of the households are described by a utility function7 uh b  where his the consumption of housing and bis the consumption of the private good. the utility function is assumed to be strictly increasing, strictly quasi concave and twice continuously differentiable in handb.
households face a budget constraint  ph bvyd y1 c0tdry c138  where pis the price of housing.8the price of the private good is set to unity. disposable income yddepends on the local income tax shifter tn0 and the exogenous tax rate structure r.
maximisation of the utility function with respect to handbsubject to the budget constraint yields the housing demand function h h h, the demand for the private good b y c0ph, and the indirect utility function vt p y uh b c16 c17  1  property 1 is a trivial result of the strictly increasing nature of the utility function and is derived by applying the implicit function theorem and the envelope theorem  property 1 .
mt p y dt dp c12 c12 c12 c12 dv 0 c0bv bp bv bt c0h  ydry b0  the marginal rate of substitution between community characteristics reflects a household s trade off between taxes and housing prices. property 1 simply follows from the fact that households dislike both high taxes and high housing prices. a household can therefore be compensated for a tax increase by a decline in housing prices and vice versa.
the following two assumptions about the form of the indirect utility function generate the segregation by income.
assumption 1 .
eh yd bh  bydyd h v1 for all ydandp  7the public good does not explicitly enter the utility function because it does not affect the following considerations as it is assumed to be constant across communities.
8note that the price for housing is a per unit price, which is independent of the level of the consumption. large houses therefore have the same per unit price as small houses. perfect price discrimination on the housing market related to the consumers income could offset the segregationmechanism that lead to property 2. however, the assumption of one common price is plausible, at least in the long run, as arbitrage opportunities would otherwise emerge.k. schmidheiny journal of public economics 90 429 458 435assumption 1 means that housing is a normal good, i.e. the elasticity of housing with respect to disposable income is smaller or equal to unity. this implies that the share of housing in thehousehold s budget decreases with after tax income.
assumption 2 .
bry  byz0 for all y  assumption 2 states that the income tax schedule is proportional or progressive.
property 2 .if assumptions 1 and 2 hold and if and only if at least one of them holds with strict inequality, then bm by 1 c0bh  bydyd h byd byy yd  h  y2ry bry  byh  yr2y n0  for all y, t and p .
proof. assumption 1 states that v1. the assumptions about the relation and the bounds of the average and the marginal tax rate guarantee that 1 c0tr c0tyrv 1 c0tr lies in 0,1 . if assumption 2, br byn0, is strictly satisfied, both addends of bm byare strictly positive. if assumption 2 is not strictly satisfied, br by 0, and assumption 1 is strictly satisfied, b1, then the second addend is zero and the first addend is strictly positive. this completes the proof of the bifq statement. the bonly if qstatement is given by the fact that if br by 0 and 1 then both addends are zero. 5 property 2 states that the mrs between local tax levels and housing prices increases monotonically with income. this means that rich households have a relatively strongerpreference for low taxes than poor households. property 2 explains why rich households make different location decisions than poor households. it is therefore the central condition giving rise to income segregation. westhoff called the analogous assumption drelative preference assumption t. it is also called the single crossing condition. in this model, relative preferences are either caused by the progressive tax schedule, the income elasticity of housing below unityor a combination of both. as will become apparent in section 5 ,property 2 plays a key role in the identification of tax rate effects in random utility maximization models of locationchoice.
3.2. location choice a household with income ychooses the community which maximizes its utility. hence, given the set of community characteristics for jac , a household prefers community jif and only if vt j pj y c0 c1 zvt i pi y for all i 2  the following propositions describe the allocation of households to communities when all communities are populated and exhibit different characteristics.k. schmidheiny journal of public economics 90 429 458 436proposition 1 .if all communities are populated and exhibit different community characteristics, then communities with higher housing prices imposelower income tax rates .
proof. suppose the opposite, i.e., that one community exhibits both lower prices and lower taxes. then all households would prefer that community for the same reason that led to property1. this is a contradiction. 5 proposition 2 .if the relative preference property holds and all communities are populated and exhibit different community characteristics, then all householdschoosing a community with lower taxes are richer than all households choosing a communitywith higher taxes .
proof. the proof proceeds in three steps. firstly, it is shown that there is a dborder thousehold in a comparison of two communities. secondly, income segregation is shown in a two communitycase. thirdly, the result is extended to more than two communities.
 define v jwv as a household s utility in jandviwvi ni. let the household with income yvprefer jtoi, hence vj c0viz0 and a household with income ywprefer i vj c0viv0. from the continuity of vinyfollows the continuity ofvj c0vii n y. the intermediate value theorem states that there is at least one y  between yvandyws.t.vj c0vi 0. this household is called the border household.
 this part uses fig. 2 . the figure shows the indifference curves in the space for three different income levels yvby byw. the indifference curves represent all pairs that households consider to be as good as community j s pair. households prefer pairs south west of the indifference curve to . note that the indifference curves are decreasing in the space . note also that, due to property 2, they become flatter as income rises. imagine a community i, characterized by , pinpjandtibtj, where household y is indifferent to j. all richer households, e.g. yw, prefer the low tax community itojand all poorer households, e.g. yv, prefer the low price community j.
t p pititj pjy  y y  fig. 2. indifference curves in the space.k. schmidheiny journal of public economics 90 429 458 437 the proposition implies that y,y is partitioned into jnon empty and non overlapping intervals ij yjhousehold with income ychooses j . suppose the opposite, i.e. yvas well asywprefer community j, but an yj,yvbyjbywstrictly prefers community i. it follows from step 1 that there is an y ,yvvy byj. step 2 implies that ywny strictly prefers itoj, which is a contradiction. 5 proposition 2 claims that any community is populated by a single and distinct income class or more fundamentally that rich households choose different communities than poor households.this proposition is assessed in the empirical part of this paper.
proposition 3 .if the local income tax rate is proportional and the household preferences are homothetic, then rich households choose thesame communities as poor households .
proof. neither assumption 1 nor 2 are satisfied with strict inequality. therefore, property 2 does not hold and the indifference curves in fig. 2 coincide. hence, all households are, independently of their income, either indifferent between all communities or all prefer the samecommunity. 5 proposition 3 shows that property 2 is a necessary condition for income segregation. there is no systematically different behavior of rich and poor households in the absence of a dscreening device tsuch as progressive taxation and or nonproportional housing demand.
3.3. adding taste heterogeneity so far, it has been assumed that households with identical preferences differ by income. this section extends the basic model by letting the households differ in both income ya  y,y , 0by, y bl, and a parameter aa 0,1 describing their taste for housing. income and taste are jointly distributed according to the density function fn0. this extension is similar in spirit to epple and platt .
the housing preference enters the utility function u and the indirect utility vj vt j pj y a c0 c1  uh  j b  j a c16 c17  3  households with a larger preference parameter aare assumed to spend, ceteris paribus, more on housing than households with a small a. the housing demand function thus increases with a  assumption 3 .
bh  ba bht p y a  ban0 for all t p yanda  this specification of preference heterogeneity preserves income segregation within a subpopulation with identical preferences. moreover, segregation of preferences emerges  proposition 4 .consider a subpopulation with equal income y. if all communities are populated and exhibit different community characteristics, then all householdsk. schmidheiny journal of public economics 90 429 458 438choosing a community with higher housing prices have a weaker taste for housing than all households choosing a community with lower housing prices .
proof. the proof is analogous to proposition 2 using the counterpart to property 2, bm ba bh  ba1 ydry b0 5 simultaneous heterogeneity by incomes and tastes leads to a more realistic pattern of household segregation in a metropolitan area. although income groups tend to gather, thesegregation is not perfect. fig. 3 shows the resulting allocation of household types to communities. the households on the borders are indifferent between neighboringcommunities j. community 1 with the lowest housing prices is populated by the poorest households with strong taste for housing, while the richest households with low housing taste are situated in community jwith the lowest tax rate and the highest housing price.
however, rich households with strong taste for housing prefer lower priced communities andpoor households with weak taste for housing group with relatively rich households in thelower tax communities.
3.4. a benchmark case this section presents the model with a specified utility function for homothetic preferences.
income segregation is therefore solely induced by the progressivity of the tax schedule. thederived indirect utility function will serve as a benchmark in the empirical study.
household preferences are described by a cobb douglas utility function uh b a alogh 1 c0a logb  the resulting demand for housing h ht p y a ay1 c0tr y c138 p  c01 increases with a. the parameter aa can therefore be seen as a measure for housing taste as defined in section 3.3.
income housing taste 1 2 jj ......
fig. 3. simultaneous income and preference segregation. the areas denoted by j 1, ...,jshow the attributes of the households that prefer community j.k. schmidheiny journal of public economics 90 429 458 439the indirect utility function in community jis vj vt j pj y a c0 c1  k c0alogpj c0 c1  logy log 1 c0tjry c2 c3  4  where k alog log.
3.5. closing the model sections 3.1 to 3.4 described individual location decisions given local tax rates and housing prices. this section outlines the complete general equilibrium model, in whichlocal tax rates and housing prices arise endogenously from aggregate behavior. individuallocation choices and community characteristics are thus simultaneously determined. as theempirical part of this paper solely relies on the location decision, this section shall only bea brief presentation.
local public expenditure g j is a function of exogenous public good provision gand the number of local residents nj. in equilibrium, the jurisdiction s budget is balanced, i.e. local expenditure gjequals local tax revenue tj  gj gg nj c0 c1  tj z1 0zy ja  yj a tjyf y a dyda njtjeyj 5  where y  j and y j are the lowest and highest income for the subpopulation with taste aa 0,1 in community j. the double integral aggregates individual tax payments over the local population. aggregate tax revenue can be expressed as the population weighted tax payment of ahousehold with average income ey j. for a given local population, eq. determines the local tax rate tj. the model therefore does not require us to assume a local public choice mechanism such as a majority vote.
housing supply hjs hs in each community jis a function of the local housing price pj and land area lj. in equilibrium, pjclears the local housing market  hs j hspj lj c0 c1  hd j z1 0z yyja  yj a htj pj gj y a c0 c1 fy a dyda 6  where hjdis aggregate housing demand in community j.
a set of local characteristics ,j 1, ...,j, and an allocation of individual households across communities is an equilibrium if all households choose their location to maximise their utility, the housing market clears in all communities, and thebudget is balanced in all communities. hodler and schmidheiny gave proof of an existence of an asymmetric equilibrium in the model with taste homogeneity.
9in equilibrium, some communities show low tax rates and high housing prices while other communities showhigh tax rates and low housing prices. the low tax communities attract richer households whichallows them to finance the public good and balance their budget with lower tax rates than the high tax communities.
9proof of existence and uniqueness of equilibria in multi community models with taste heterogeneity is notoriously difficult . hodler and schmidheiny present simulated equilibria in a calibrated version of the model with taste heterogeneity.k. schmidheiny journal of public economics 90 429 458 4404. alternative explanations for income segregation the theoretical model in the previous section relates income segregation solely to institutions and markets . there are othermechanisms which potentially explain income segregation in metropolitan areas. this sectiondiscusses two leading alternative explanations which are considered in the empirical implementation.
4.1. income segregation and distance the classic framework for the study of residence choice and housing prices in urban areas was developed by von thu nen and formalized by alonso ,beckmann ,muth  andmills . in the basic model, a monocentric city is characterized by a single central business district where all job opportunities are located. fujita nicely shows how this basic structure explains segregation of the population by incomes if commuting costs are monetary expenditures, the rich locate farther from the center than the poor. the opposite holds ifcommuting costs are time lost while travelling. the former proposition was often used to explainthe affluent suburbs in u.s. cities by high monetary commuting costs. the latter propositioncorresponds with the rich japanese city centers and the fact that japanese firms used to pay themonetary commuting costs. the von thu nen approach seems to have strong explanatory power even in its basic form. however, wheaton already concluded that this type of model bempirically contributes little to the explanations of american location income patterns qand that fiscal and other externalities are more important.
4.2. income segregation and social interactions there is growing literature in economics and mathematical sociology that models the emergence of segregation from social interactions. schelling showed how an intrinsic preference of white households for living with other white households leads toendogenous racial segregation. be nabou and durlauf integrate models of fiscal decentralization with models of social interactions. they assume that the productivity of schooling depends on the social mix of the neighborhood, and that investment ineducation depends on the local tax base. the income distribution of the neighborhood is then thedeterminant of households location decisions but also their consequence. this feedback effectof the aggregate outcome on the individual decisions is typical for models with socialinteractions. in equilibrium, rich households cluster in order to supply a better education to theiroffspring, while poor households stay away because of high housing costs. there is only littleempirical evidence on the role of social interactions for the emergence of segregation.
bayer et al. establish neighborhood effects in the location choice of households.
ioannides and zabel show that both the demographic composition of the neighborhood and the actual behavior of the closest neighbors are important determinants for thechoice of a dwelling.
5. the econometric model if spatial income segregation is the result of individual households decisions it can be studied by looking at the decisions when they are made. households do not daily decide upon their placek. schmidheiny journal of public economics 90 429 458 441of residence. there are specific moments in any individual s life when the decision about where to live becomes urgent. such moments occur for example when an individual leaves college tostart a first job, when a couple decides to move together or when the family size changes. careeropportunities later in life and changing budget constraints further trigger the decision to move.these are the moments when households have to evaluate potential residential locations.limiting the analysis to moving households therefore eliminates the bias when including households that stay in a per se sub optimal location because of high monetary and psychological costs of moving. however, the limitation to moving households introduces apotential selection bias when the unobserved individual factors that trigger the decision to moveare correlated with the unobserved individual taste for certain locations.
the location choice in the theoretical model in section 3 naturally leads to a multinomial response model based on random utility maximization . the indirect utility v njof a household nin location jis the sum of a systematic and a stochastic part v  nj vnj enj  vnjis a deterministic function of observable household and community characteristics and enj is a household and community specific error term. equivalent to eq. in the theoretical model, a household nchooses community jas its place of residence if it offers the highest value of indirect utility, i.e.
v  njzv  nifor all iac 1 ... j 7  5.1. functional form and identification the indirect utility function in the theoretical part guides the choice of systematic factors in the indirect utility function vnj vt nj pj aj yn hn c0 c1  8  where tnjis the average income tax rate of household nin community j,pjis the housing price in community j,ajindicates further location specific characteristics, ynis household income and hn indicates further household characteristics. note that from the point of view of an individual household, the community characteristics pj,tnjandajare exogenous, although they are the  aggregate of the agents decisions.
the functional form of the deterministic part eq. of the latent variable needs to be specified for the empirical implementation. starting point is the indirect utility function from the benchmark case presented in section 3.4 , vnj b0 b1log 1 c0tnj c0 c1  b2logpj c0 c1  b3logyn  in this homothetic specification, income segregation can only be generated through the tax rate tnj, which depends on the community j, but also on the household nthrough the progressivity of the tax scheme and through household type specific deductibles. the theoreticalmodel introduces two additional mechanisms for segregation income elasticity of housingk. schmidheiny journal of public economics 90 429 458 442below unity and heterogeneous taste for housing. i introduce these two mechanisms by varying the coefficient b2with household income and other household characteristics  b2 a20 a21logyn a22hn  housing consumption as a function of disposable income ydn yn is implied by roy s identity . it is indeed monotonic in the taste parameter a22 bh ba22 c0a22   b3 dydn pj. the elasticity of housing consumption with respect to disposable income eh,ydn b2is below 1 as long as the effect of prices on utility is negative, b2b0, and decreasing in absolute value in income, a21n0 .
i also allow the effect of taxes to vary with household income  b1 a10 a11logyn  location specific constants djcapture all observed and unobserved local characteristics that attract households to a location. the effect of any observed community characteristic such as housing prices, pj, cannot be distinguished from the constant of this community and a20is thus not identified. furthermore, factors that shift the indirect utility of all alternatives in the same way arenot identified, hence b 3cannot be estimated. the resulting identified base model is therefore vnj dj a10log 1 c0tnj c0 c1  a11log 1 c0tnj c0 c1 logyn a21logpj c0 c1 logyn a22logpj c0 c1 hn  in the full model of the econometric specification, i allow for segregation through the interaction of additional location specific characteristics aj share rich, share foreigners, share foreign pupils, distance, distance2 with household income log and further household characteristics hn household size, foreign status, children .
5.2. modelling the stochastic part the stochastic part enjcaptures all factors of community choice that are hidden from the researcher but known to the household. it therefore represents all unobserved factors such as more detailed socio demographic information about the household as well as all unobservable factors such as the household members attachment to a certain location. several specificationsare used and compared in the empirical analysis.
the first specification assumes that the error terms follow independently and identically an extreme value distribution. the cumulative distribution function is fe nj c0 c1  e c0e c0enj  this leads to the conditional logit model. the probability that household nchooses community jis pnjh evnj xj i 1evni 9  where vniis the deterministic part of the utility of household nin community iandh bis the set of parameters to be estimated. the independence of the error term implies that a household sstochastic, i.e. unobserved, preference for a certain location is fully independent of its stochasticpreference for other locations. the strong and unpleasant consequences of this assumption arediscussed in the literature as independence of irrelevant alternatives .k. schmidheiny journal of public economics 90 429 458 443the nested logit model is a generalization of the conditional logit model that avoids iia by allowing a specific pattern of correlations across the error terms . the vector of all location specific error terms en follows the generalized extreme value distribution introduced by mcfadden  fen e c0pk kp iacke c0eni kk c18 c19kk    the choice set c is divided into kmutually exclusive subsets ck, called nests.
the unobserved portions of utility eniare correlated within the same nest kand independent across nests. the parameter kkcaptures the correlation within nest k, i.e. corr 1 c0kk2for alli,jack. the extreme case kk 1 means that there is no correlation within nest k. the nested logit model is consistent with random utility maximization if kka 0,1 . setting all kkto unity leads to the conditional logit model. the probability that household nchooses location jis pnjh evnj klp iaclevni kl c16 c17kl c01 pk kp iackevni kk c18 c19kk 10  where lis the nest of location jandh .10the nested structure of the error term can be looked at as the result of a two part choice households choose a certain nest first and afterwardsan alternative within the nest. in the empirical study the first step is naturally the decisionwhether to move to a borough in the center community or to move to a community in theperiphery. households with a large unobserved preference for a location in the periphery  therefore also have a higher preference for all other communities in the periphery .
themultinomial probit model enables a more flexible specification of the error term compared to the previous two models. the vector of error terms across alternatives is assumed to follow a jvariate normal distribution e nfn0 6  where 6is the j c2jvariance covariance matrix.11this study uses a very parsimonious specification of 6. following bolduc andbolduc et al. ,12the alternative specific error terms follow a first order spatial autoregressive process 13 en qwen nn  10note that this form of the likelihood function is directly derived from the random utility model and the generalized extreme value distribution. some software packages, e.g. the nlogit command in stata, use a slightly different likelihood function in their implementation of nested logit. these likelihood functions are not consistent with random utilitymaximisation. see hensher and greene for a critical discussion.
11this general form allows for all possible correlation patterns across the unobserved part of utility. this flexibility, however, comes at a price the estimation of multinomial probit models is numerically demanding andthe general variance covariance needs to be restricted for both theoretical and practical reasons. due to the fact that theagents only care about the utility differences across alternatives, 6needs normalizing and only a maximum of j  2 c01 parameters can be estimated compared to the j 2 distinct elements in 6. in the case of e.g.
17 alternatives there are still 135 parameters to be estimated. these parameters are in practice hardly identified.
12bolduc et al. present one of the rare applications of sar in multinomial response models. they use a slightly different specification and mix the multivariate normal sar process with an extreme value distribution.
13seeanselin and florax for a general treatise of sar processes.k. schmidheiny journal of public economics 90 429 458 444where nn n and qa is a parameter to be estimated. wis an exogenous j c2j weighting matrix where the weight wjiis a decreasing function of the distance dijbetween community jandi wji 1 dji xj s 11 djs and satisfies wji wij,wii 0 andp swis 1 by construction. the variance covariance of the error term can be derived as 6q i c0qw c01i c0qw c01 because qa guarantees the nonsingularity of . the probability that household nchooses community jis pnjh prob e1 c0ejnvnj c0vn1 ... ej c0ejnvnj c0vnj c2 c3  11  where h . the above spatial pattern means that households with a strong unobserved taste for a certain community also like other communities geographically close to that community.
5.3. estimation the conditional and nested logit models are estimated using maximum likelihood and full information maximum likelihood respectively. the log likelihood function is loglh xn n 1xj j 1znjlogpnjh 12  where znj 1 if the household nchooses location jandznj 0 otherwise. the choice probabilities pnjof the conditional logit and nested logit model are defined in eqs. and , respectively. the maximum likelihood estimator h is consistent, asymptotically efficient and normally distributed.
the multinomial probit model is estimated with maximum simulated likelihood based on eq. . the calculation of the likelihood requires the integration of a 16 variate normal distribution. as there is no analytic solution to this problem numerical integration routines or simulation methods are applied. a standard method is the geweke hajivassiliou keane ghk choice probability simulator . ghk simulates the choice probabilities pnjin eq.  by recursively drawing from univariate normal distributions. this study uses r 1000 pseudorandom draws in each dimension. the properties of the msl estimator h are equivalent to standard ml if the number of draws rgrows faster than  np .14 6. data the empirical investigation is based on non public household data from the tax administration of the canton of basel stadt. the data contain information of all households 14all estimations are performed with the author s own programs matlab. a toolbox with programs for conditional logit, nested logit, multinomial probit and mixed logit models is available on request. the newton raphson algorithm with the broyden fletcher goldfrab shanno method for updating the hessian matrix was used for numericalmaximization. all parameters, including the coefficients of the correlation structure, have been appropriately scaled during optimization. the estimation of the multinomial probit model runs 70 h on a sun fire v880.k. schmidheiny journal of public economics 90 429 458 445in the city of basel that moved within the city or from the city to a municipality in the periphery in the year 1997.
the decision maker in the theoretical model is a household.15the choice set of these households is restricted to the city of basel and a circle of 16 municipalities around it.16this leaves 7872 households with 11,540 members in the data set. the included municipalities belongto three different cantons, basel stadt , basel land and solothurn and thusexhibit great variability in tax levels and tax schedules. in the estimation of the full specification, the center municipality is divided into 19 city boroughs. see fig. 4 for a map of the included municipalities and city boroughs.
in addition to income, there is some limited demographic information on these households   inc total gross income of all household members, 17  hhsize number of persons living in the household,  child one or more under age children in household,  foreign primary earner is not a swiss citizen.
the universe of moving households with 11,540 members  differs from the population in the city of basel. the average household size of moving 15households are operationalized as all individuals who moved from a common old address to a common new address  families in a narrower sense, married and unmarried couples as well as people who simply share a flat. married couplesthat move from single households to the same street address are treated as one household. unmarried individuals whomove to the same street address are treated as independent households.
16the municipalities are defined as all municipalities of whom more than 36 of the working population is commuting to the center . this admittedly arbitrary cut off point leads to a well shaped geographic area and a traceable number of choice alternatives. the five smallest municipalities are omitted as they are not covered in the tax scheduledata. a narrow definition of the metropolitan area is also appropriate because tiebout type models ignore the location ofthe work place. when households decide upon their place of residence on a national or global scale, job opportunities are naturally very important. in narrow metropolitan areas, however, it is reasonable to assume that any municipality is a feasible place of residence for households whose members are working in the central business district. changing thechoice set did not qualitatively change the results of the analysis.
17according to the last tax assessment before moving, the relevant gross income according to the last tax assessment before moving. the relevant gross income would be the gross income after moving, which is not available. incomebefore moving is a good proxy if a household s decision to move does not coincide with a change in its income.municipalities in the basel area boroughs in the city of basel city of basel periphery rhine riverfrance germany switzerlandcity tracts rhine rivermtzallrhn arl ettrei aesthw h flobw m nbin bl bbotbrsbet 5 715 8 611 3 2419 10 918 14 11617 1213 fig. 4. municipalities and city boroughs in the basel metropolitan area.k. schmidheiny journal of public economics 90 429 458 446household is 1.5 while it is 1.8 in the whole population . the dataset reports an average of 1.67 under age children in 19 of allhouseholds, compared to 1.69 children in 18 of households inthe resident population . the share of foreign moving households is 20 while the share of foreigners in the city of basel is 24 . the fraction ofhouseholds with an income above chf 75,000 is 26 and exactly the same for movers  and residents . however, the fraction of households with incomes below chf 40,000is 37 for the movers but only 16 for the whole city population.
18the reference person in moving households is with an average of 36 years considerably younger than in the residentpopulation with 51 years.
table 1 reports descriptive statistics of selected variables by chosen locations. from the total of 7872 households that stayed within the choice set, 4 5 moved within the centermunicipality whereas only 1 5 moved to one of the 16 communities in the periphery. the income of the latter households was on average 20 higher than that of the ones remaining in the center. the very low tax communities attracted particularly rich households. the sizeof households is about the same in thecenter and in the periphery. however, there is substantial variation across the municipalitiesin the periphery and across city boroughs.
as this study uses location specific constants, only variables that are potentially accountable for residential income segregation are considered. i collected the following location specific datafrom various sources   tax hypothetical average tax rate for totalled cantonal  and municipal income taxes, reflecting municipality state specific progressive taxschemes, municipal tax shifters and household municipality state specific tax deductions,  rent average offer price per m 2for a rented flat,  share rich share of resident households with income above chf 75,000,  share foreigners population share of non swiss citizens,  share foreign pupils share of non swiss pupils at primary school,  distance distance in km between a municipality and the central business district.
see the appendix for a detailed description of variables and data sources. descriptive statistics of selected location specific variables are presented in table 1 .
7. results 7.1. estimating the base model this section presents the estimates of the base model reported in table 2 . the base model is a direct implementation of the theoretical model in section 3. in this section, i model the locationchoice of moving households as a choice among 17 alternative communities the city of basel 18note that federal data do not report very low income households which are exempted from federal income taxes.k. schmidheiny journal of public economics 90 429 458 447and 16 peripheral communities. three specifications of the error term structure are reported in the respectively labelled columns the conditional logit model, the nested logit model and themultinomial probit model with a spatial autoregressive process .
the specification of the error term is discussed first. the significant log sum coefficient in the nested logit model shows the violation of the iia assumption in the conditional logittable 1 characteristics of in movers and locations in movers locationsmoved inmean incmean hhsizetax mid ataxhigh amedianrentshare rich bforeignpupils c whole area 7872 61.6 1.5city of basel 6370 59.3 1.5 6.2 24.4 197 0.26 0.41 alt grossbasel 134 77.8 1.3 203 0.39 0.21 v orstaedte 191 66.5 1.2 200 0.34 0.34am ring 440 59.3 1.4 197 0.30 0.25breite 328 60.5 1.4 202 0.19 0.35 st. alban 279 72.0 1.5 201 0.36 0.18 gundeldingen 820 54.6 1.4 198 0.21 0.58bruderholz 210 93.4 1.8 220 0.44 0.09bachletten 439 67.1 1.5 206 0.33 0.11 gotthelf 247 60.1 1.3 204 0.24 0.19 iselin 696 51.5 1.4 191 0.19 0.38st. johann 728 53.3 1.5 191 0.21 0.56 alt kleinbasel 112 51.2 1.3 192 0.22 0.38 clara 158 55.8 1.4 190 0.21 0.59wettstein 220 63.8 1.5 192 0.25 0.18hirzbrunnen 189 67.1 1.8 192 0.25 0.21 rosental 170 54.8 1.4 192 0.19 0.72 matthaeus 661 53.7 1.5 188 0.21 0.68klybeck 252 54.3 1.6 188 0.20 0.58kleinhueningen 96 59.1 1.5 188 0.20 0.52 periphery 1502 71.3 1.5 hofstet. flueh 18 64.9 1.9 5.1 26.4 190 0.40 0.10bettingen 9 70.0 1.3 4.7 20.9 220 0.47 0.13 riehen 280 83.9 1.6 3.7 21.8 206 0.41 0.13 aesch 57 63.0 1.5 5.3 23.3 213 0.33 0.25allschwil 251 69.3 1.6 5.1 21.8 207 0.32 0.17arlesheim 56 57.6 1.3 4.9 21.9 215 0.37 0.19 biel benken 18 88.6 1.6 4.9 20.9 226 0.48 0.04 binningen 165 73.4 1.4 5.0 21.8 205 0.36 0.23birsfelden 98 52.4 1.3 5.5 23.2 200 0.24 0.37bottmingen 43 76.4 1.6 5.1 22.1 206 0.47 0.18 ettingen 24 61.5 1.7 5.3 23.5 197 0.41 0.08 muenchenstein 92 59.0 1.5 5.2 22.3 198 0.31 0.18muttenz 114 63.3 1.6 5.3 22.7 192 0.35 0.16 oberwil 80 77.0 1.4 4.9 21.1 211 0.42 0.15 reinach 151 72.2 1.5 5.1 22.5 212 0.36 0.14therwil 46 91.7 1.8 5.1 22.7 207 0.38 0.12 acantonal and communal average income tax rate for married couple with two children and income of chf 60,000 and chf 500,000 respectively.
bshare of households with annual income above chf 75,000.
cshare of pupils with non swiss citizenship in primary schools.k. schmidheiny journal of public economics 90 429 458 448model.19the estimate k 0.58 implies that the error terms across municipalities in the periphery are positively correlated. this means that households with an unobserved taste for a municipalityin the periphery also prefer other municipalities in the periphery. the estimated spatialautocorrelation coefficient q in the multinomial probit model is not significantly different from zero and does not support the proposed spatial error term structure. the nested logit model isthus the preferred model. the following discussion relates to the results of the nestedmultinomial logit model.
the coefficient for log gives the effect of the tax rate on the indirect utility function for a household with an average income of chf 61,612. it is significantly positive on the 0.1  level and confirms that progressive taxes have a negative effect on utility. it also implies, throughthe progressivity of the tax scheme, that the effect is larger for rich households than for poorones. the significantly positive coefficient of the interaction with log c0log implies that the tax effect increases with income beyond what is implied by the progressivity of the taxscheme. the quantitative implications are discussed in the full model in the followingsubsection.
the interactions of the housing rent with income and household size turn out to be insignificant. the base model gives therefore no indication that the housing price effect varies with either income or household size. housing prices thus cannot explain the income segregationof moving households. note that this does not rule out that housing prices have a strong effect, common to all households, on the attractiveness of a municipality. this effectis part of the municipality specific constant and therefore not identified.
19in this section, the center municipality is a nest of its own, called a degenerated nest with kk 1.table 2 estimation of the base model conditional logit nested logit mult. probit, sard average income tax loga17.8 15.7 13.8  log c2 log c0log 11.3 11.0 9.8  housing price log c2 log c0log c00.13 0.28 0.00  log c2hh size 0.71 0.04 0.14  correlation structure coefficients log sum periphery 0.58 ,c spatial autocorrelation 0.25  community specific constants city of basel 0 0 0 mean periphery constantsb c05.18 c03.73 c04.10 log likelihood c07440.0 c07438.6 c07444.4 number of alternatives 17 17 17 number of observations 7872 7872 7872 standard errors in brackets, , , significance at the 0.1 , 1 and 5 level.
athe coefficient gives the effect for a household with mean income .
bmean of 16 individual community effects. all effects are significantly smaller than 0 .
ctested against 1, i.e. the error terms are independent across communities in the periphery.
dslope coefficients and constants of the multinomial probit are multiplied by p  6p such that the error term variance of the multinomial probit equals the one in the logit models.k. schmidheiny journal of public economics 90 429 458 4497.2. estimating the extended model this section presents the results of estimations with an extended choice set and several additional factors. the location choice of households is now among 35 alternatives 16 peripheral communities and 19 boroughs in the center municipality. the subdivision of the large center municipality allows to consider the substantial intra municipality variation especially ofsocial context variables. this permits to disentangle the effect of social context variables fromthe effect of the local tax, which is constant within the center municipality.
20table 3 reports the estimates of nested logit models for the base and the fullspecification in the respectively labelled columns.table 3 nested logit estimation of the full model base model full model average income tax loga16.0 12.5  log c2 log c0log 11.2 5.6  housing price log c2 log c0log 0.19 0.29  log c2hh size c00.04 c00.53  social interactions with residents income share rich c2 log c0log 0.44  social interactions with residents alien status share foreigners c2foreign 1.63  share foreigners c2 log c0log c00.21  share foreign pupils c2childb c00.42  share foreign pupils c2child c2 log c0log c00.38  share foreign pupils c2child c2foreign 1.12  distance from cbd in km2 distance 100 c2 log c0log 3.52  2 c2 log c0log c00.39  distance 100 c2hh size 6.08  2 c2hh size c00.31  correlation structure coefficients log sum center 0.07 ,c0.51 ,c log sum periphery 0.56 ,c0.62 ,c location specific constants mean city constantsd00 mean periphery constantse c03.48 c02.30 log likelihood c024,881 c024,670 number of alternatives 35 35observations 7872 7872 standard errors in brackets, , , significance at the 0.1 , 1 and 5 level.
athe coefficient gives the effect for a household with mean income .
bthe coefficient gives the effect for a household with mean income and swiss citizenship.
ctested against 1, i.e. the error terms are independent across communities in the periphery.
dmean of 19 constants of city boroughs. mean is set to zero for identification.
emean of 16 constants of peripheral communities. all effects are smaller than 0 .
20income tax rates and the share of rich households are highly correlated across municipalities as shown in section 2.
this poses a potential multi collinearity problem. the consideration of intra municipality variation helps to overcome this problem.k. schmidheiny journal of public economics 90 429 458 450the base model replicates the results in the previous section, now considering intramunicipality variation of housing prices and allowing for differing error terms for the 19 citytracts. the results are almost identical to the previous findings in table 2 . note in particular that the error terms across city boroughs are almost perfectly correlated , supporting the treatment of the city as asingle unit in the previous section .
thefull model controls the base model for potential segregation due to social interactions and distance. note that both log sum coefficients are significantly different from unity. thecorrelation across error terms is 1 c00.51 2 0.74 between boroughs in the center and 1 c00.622 0.62 between municipalities in the periphery. this means that households with an unobserved taste for a location in the center also prefer other locations in the center.
the coefficients for the local income tax as well as for its interaction with household income are significantly different from 0. their effect is, however, smaller than in the base model. the significantly positive coefficient of the interaction with log c0log  implies that the tax effect increases with income beyond what is implied by theprogressivity of the tax scheme. when income doubles, the effect of taxes increases bylog d5.6 12.5 31 on top of the effect from the progressivity of the tax scheme. this study can only speculate about the reasons for the high priority of local taxes in the locationdecision of high income households. high income households might for example rely moreon advice from professional real estate and investment consultants who propose moving totax heavens as a form of tax optimization.
the quantitative impact of the tax rate and its role for income segregation is best explained using an example consider a two child family with average income of chf 61,612 thatcompares the borough iselin in the city of basel to the neighboring municipality of allschwil in the canton of basel land . the tax rates it faces are 6.2 in iselin and 5.1 in allschwil. the model predicts  ceteris paribus, i.e. all locations have identical characteristics except for taxes that the averageincome household moves to the borough of iselin with a probability of 2.1 and to themunicipality of allschwil with a probability of 3.6 hence the odds are 1.7 in favor of allschwil.
21consider now a rich two child family with an income of chf 500,000. this family faces tax rates of 24.4 and 21.8 in iselin and allschwil, respectively. for this family themodel predicts again, ceteris paribus odds of 3.7 in favor of allschwil which is far higher than for the averageincome household.
22note that considering all factors , the odds for a swiss two child family with average income are in favor of iselin andfor a rich swiss family in favor of allschwil .
the interaction of housing rent with household income is not significant. however, the interaction of housing rents with household size is significantly negative. assuming that the base effect from housing prices is negative this does mean that the price effectincreases in absolute value with the size of the household. in other words larger households aremore concerned about housing prices than smaller ones.
21the difference in indirect utility between allschwil and iselin due to the tax differential is log c0 log d12.5 0.15 for the average income family.
22the difference in indirect utility between allschwil and iselin due to the tax differential is log c0log d 0.82 for the rich family, hence 5.5 times larger than for the average income family.k. schmidheiny journal of public economics 90 429 458 451social interaction as mechanism for residential income segregation is considered in three context variables. firstly as the share of rich households23that already live in the location, secondly as the share of foreigners in the location and thirdly as the share of foreign pupils at the primaryschools. the interaction of the share of rich households with household income is significantlypositive. this means that rich households are more attracted by locations with a large share ofrich households than are poor households.
24 the interaction of the local share of foreigners with the foreign status of the household is significantly positive. foreign households therefore tend to locate close to other foreignhouseholds. the interaction with household income is significantly negative, implying that richhouseholds shun neighborhoods with a large foreign population.
the share of foreign pupils captures a further type of social interactions. school quality may be strongly determined by peer group effects in class. in switzerland, parents are concerned aboutpupils from low educated backgrounds and non native speaking pupils as their children s peers.these characteristics are not directly observable but highly correlated with the observed alien status of pupils. the interaction of the share of foreign pupils with a dummy variable for households with children is significantly negative. this means that swiss households with children and averageincome are seeking school districts with a small share of foreign children. the effect sharplyincreases with income it triples c01.22c3d c00.38 for a rich swiss family with an income of chf 500,000 and falls to zero for a very poor family with anincome of chf 20,000. the effect also changes its sign for foreign families with average income. this significantly positive effect reveals that foreign average income families tend to locate in school districts with many other foreign pupils. rich foreign families with income above chf 380,000, however, also prefer districts with fewer foreign pupils.
distance from the central business district is interacted with household income and household size. i also include distance squared to allow for a non linear effect of distance. thetwo interaction effects with household income are significantly different from zero. theinteraction effect of distance and household income is positive up to 9 km from the cbd 4.5 km and negative thereafter. rich households are therefore more likely to move to the first ring of municipalities around the center, sometimes called thebspeckgu rtelq, than poor households. the interaction of distance and distance squared with household size is also significant. the interaction effect is always positive and strongest towards the edge of the metropolitan area 9.7 km from the cbd , meaning that larger households care less about distance than smaller households. this could be explained by the factthat larger households usually include children and or a non working spouse which depend lesson the cbd than for example a working single.
7.3. assessing the relative importance of taxes, housing costs and social interactions for income segregation the relative importance of the factors for income segregation in the full model is not immediately readable from the estimated coefficients. i assess the relative importance bycomparing the predicted segregation pattern in counterfactual simulations. given the attributes 23typically, average or median income is used as context variable. as this information is not available, i use the share of the top income group.
24the interaction of household income and income of the residents income can be derived by including the squared difference between household and location income in the indirect utility function. the two resulting squared terms are not identified.k. schmidheiny journal of public economics 90 429 458 452of the households and the locations, the model predicts the average income of the households that move to a particular municipality or city borough j  xn n 1ynpnj hh c16 c17  xn n 1pnj hh c16 c17  table 4 observed and predicted average income of movers observed full model taxesarentasocialadistancea whole area 61.6 61.6 61.6 61.6 61.6 61.6 city of basel  alt grossbasel 77.8 61.0 60.3 61.8 69.0 55.4 v orsta dte 66.5 57.6 60.3 61.7 65.1 55.4 am ring 59.3 56.6 60.3 61.6 64.4 55.4breite 60.5 61.3 60.3 61.7 59.6 64.9 st. alban 72.0 68.2 60.3 61.7 68.4 63.2 gundeldingen 54.6 56.2 60.3 61.6 57.6 61.5bruderholz 93.4 77.9 60.3 62.2 73.4 67.8bachletten 67.1 66.6 60.3 61.8 68.6 61.5 gotthelf 60.1 59.8 60.3 61.8 63.4 59.6 iselin 51.5 57.2 60.3 61.5 59.0 61.5st. johann 53.3 55.8 60.3 61.5 57.4 61.5 alt kleinbasel 51.2 54.7 60.3 61.5 60.3 57.5 clara 55.8 53.6 60.3 61.4 57.1 59.6wettstein 63.8 59.7 60.3 61.5 63.7 59.6hirzbrunnen 67.1 65.4 60.3 61.5 63.8 64.9 rosental 54.8 54.2 60.3 61.5 55.7 61.5 mattha us 53.7 53.1 60.3 61.4 56.5 59.6 klybeck 54.3 56.4 60.3 61.4 56.3 63.2kleinhu ningen 59.1 58.6 60.3 61.4 57.1 64.9 periphery hofstett. flu h 64.9 57.0 59.2 61.4 67.2 53.9 bettingen 70.0 86.8 73.3 62.0 68.4 66.3riehen 83.9 80.8 70.2 61.7 67.1 66.2 aesch 63.0 64.0 63.5 61.9 62.8 61.5 allschwil 69.3 73.9 68.6 61.7 63.6 65.5arlesheim 57.6 74.7 68.5 61.9 64.4 65.9 biel benken 88.6 86.0 72.4 62.2 70.7 65.2 binningen 73.4 70.5 68.6 61.7 63.9 61.9birsfelden 52.4 62.5 63.5 61.6 59.3 63.3bottmingen 76.4 76.3 67.5 61.7 68.0 64.9 ettingen 61.5 66.0 62.8 61.5 67.4 59.5 mu nchenstein 59.0 71.6 66.8 61.6 63.0 65.8 muttenz 63.3 72.0 65.4 61.5 64.4 66.3oberwil 77.0 81.4 71.6 61.8 67.0 66.2 reinach 72.2 73.1 66.1 61.8 65.0 66.3 therwil 91.7 73.3 65.4 61.7 66.4 65.8 standard deviation b10.5 8.2 3.1 0.2 4.7 3.1 unexplained std. dev.b,c5.5 9.2 10.3 6.8 9.5 explained varianceb,d0.73 0.22 0.02 0.57 0.17 correlation with observedb0.86 0.52 0.76 0.86 0.43 auses only slope coefficients only for tax, rent, social interactions or distance, respectively.
bweighted by observed migrating population.
cstandard deviation of the difference between true and predicted average incomes.
d1 c02 2.k. schmidheiny journal of public economics 90 429 458 453table 4 shows the predicted average incomes using the full model and using only a distinct causal channel, i.e. setting the other coefficients to zero. the spatial pattern of these incomedifferentials is displayed in fig. 5 . the full model predicts large income differentials across places, similar to the observed ones both in their magnitude and in their spatial pattern 429 458 454the top two maps in fig. 5 . 71 of the observed differences in average incomes across locations are explained by the full model. taxes alone can account for 23 of the observed variation theyare, of course, not able to explain any intra city differences. social interactions alone can explain55 of the difference in average incomes they are especially powerful in explaining intra cityvariation. the distance from the city center alone predicts 17 of the observed variation itcaptures the circular pattern with richer household in a close ring of municipalities around the city. housing rents, while significantly interacting with household size, do not account for any substantial income segregation.
8. conclusions this study investigates spatial segregation of the population in fiscally decentralized urban areas. the theoretical part proposes the progressivity of local income taxes as a new theoreticalexplanation for income segregation.
the empirical part studies how income tax differentials across municipalities affect the location decisions of households in the metropolitan area of basel. the estimation results showthat rich households are substantially and significantly more likely to move to low taxmunicipalities than poor households. the higher valuation of low taxes by rich households ispartly explained by the progressivity of the local income tax. however, rich households preferlow tax municipalities to a greater extent than is explained by the tax schedule. this impact oftaxes holds after controlling for alternative explanations.
distance form the city center also determines the households locational choice. rich households are more likely than poor ones found in places away from the city center up to the first ring of periphery communities, but less likely further out. large households are also morelikely to move out of town than small households. housing prices as observed offer littleexplanation for the observed segregation pattern.
social interactions are established as another major source of income segregation.
households in general tend to choose locations close to other households like themselves rich households are significantly more likely to locate in areas with a high fraction of richresidents. foreign households seek locations with a high share of foreign residents, while rich  households seek locations with a low share of foreigners. swiss families and rich foreign families are avoiding school districts with a large share of foreign pupils, whileforeign families with average income actively seek them.
acknowledgments the discussions with klaus neusser, mike gerfin, and veronika aegerter, greatly improved this paper. i would like to thank my anonymous referees and the editor, hans werner sinn, for their constructive comments and suggestions. i am grateful to the tax administration and the statistical office of the canton of basel stadt for the provision of the household data and towu est und partner for the provision of the housing price data, my thanks to martin sandtner and ju rg mosimann in particular. financial support from the swiss national foundation and the hospitality of the hwwa hamburg institute of international economics is gratefullyacknowledged. i thank katherine baicker, michel bierlaire, denis bolduc, marius bru lhart, dennis epple, yannis ioannides, mario jametti, holger sieg, michael smart, kenneth train, andthe participants of the tapes conference on fiscal federalism, the crans montana workshop on globalization and economic geography and of seminars at carnegie mellon, university ofk. schmidheiny journal of public economics 90 429 458 455toronto and mcmaster for valuable comments and suggestions. heather murray helped me find the right words.
appendix a. data the data used in the empirical investigation were made available by the following institutions  notes on the construction of the variables  income the information on the household income is based on the tax assessment. unmarried adult household members and children with their own income are assessed individually. the income of all individually assessed household members is added up.
the income in the raw data is income before tax and deductions for children and spouse but aftersocial security contributions and further deductions. the study uses gross incomewhich was calculated without considering further individual deductions.
children number of children that allow for tax deductions.
tax rate the tables from the swiss federal tax administration report the totalled cantonal and municipal average tax rates for differenthousehold types and for selected gross incomes. the tax rates for households with income between the reported income classes and for household types not listed were interpolated. the tax rates forhousehold members with individual tax assessment were first calculated individually. the tax rateof the household is calculated from the totalled individual tax amounts.
rent wu est und partner collected all rents for flats offered in newspapers and in the internet in 1997. missing information on exact flat sizes was inferred fromthe information given in the advertisements.
distance distance between the geographical centers of the municipalities. the center was taken as the middle of the maximal east west and north south extensions.
references