american sociological review   1    26  american sociological  association 2016doi 10.1177 0003122416642430http asr.sagepub.com families have become more segregated by  income between neighborhoods over the past 40 years. income segregation between neighborhoods increased during the 1970s and 1980s, changed little during the 1990s, and increased again during the 2000s . the increase in income segregation was partly due to rising income inequality, which led to a wider gap between high and low income families in the housing and neighborhoods they could afford . however, trends in income inequality vary by house hold   composition that is, whether children   live in a household. income inequality rose faster among households with children than 642430 asr xxx10.1177 0003122416642430american sociological reviewowens 2016 auniversity of southern california corresponding author  ann owens, department of sociology, university of southern california, 851 downey way, los angeles, ca 90089 e mail annowens usc.eduinequality in children s  contexts income segregation of households with and without children ann owensa abstract past research shows that income segregation between neighborhoods increased over the  past several decades. in this article, i reexamine income segregation from 1990 to 2010 in the 100 largest metropolitan areas, and i find that income segregation increased only among families with children. among childless households two thirds of the population income segregation changed little and is half as large as among households with children. i examine two factors that may account for these differences by household composition. first, i find that increasing income inequality, identified by past research as a driver of income segregation, was a much more powerful predictor of income segregation among families with children, among whom income inequality has risen more. second, i find that local school options, delineated by school district boundaries, contribute to higher segregation among households with children compared to households without. rising income inequality provided high income households more resources, and parents used these resources to purchase housing in particular neighborhoods, with residential decisions structured, in part, by school district boundaries. overall, results indicate that children face greater and increasing stratification in neighborhood contexts than do all residents, and this has implications for growing inequalities in their future outcomes.
keywords neighborhood segregation, income segregation, school district fragmentation, school district segregation, income inequality  at univ california santa barbara on april 29, 2016 asr.sagepub.com downloaded from 2 american sociological review  among households without children . in addition, the class gap in investments in children has grown over the past several decades , with high income parents increas ingly outspending low income parents. resi dence in neighborhoods seen as advanta geous for children may be an additional investment parents make. these trends sug gest that income segregation may have risen faster among households with children than among those without.
financial resources influence residential  decisions, but residential decisions are also shaped by households preferences given the set of affordable options. households with chil dren may have different preferences than those without children for type and size of housing stock, neighborhood racial or age composition, and public goods like safety and schooling. in particular, parents likely pay special attention to the local structure of school options in terms of school district and attendance zone bounda ries. despite the proliferation of non local options , 73 percent of public school children attended their neighborhood school in 2007 . local school options may be a key mechanism struc turing the residential choices of families with children, leading to higher income segregation among them than among childless households, for whom school options are less relevant.
this article documents income segregation  between neighborhoods among households with and without children from 1990 to 2010. my analyses address two research questions first, what are the trends in income segrega tion between neighborhoods by household composition i find that, on average, the increase in income segregation between neigh borhoods over the past two decades occurred exclusively among families with children. income segregation between neighborhoods is higher and increased by about 20 percent among families with children, but it changed little among childless households, who make up the majority of u.s. households.second, do school options and income  inequality account for the higher level and greater rise in income segregation among households with children i find that the gap in income segregation between households with and without children is larger in metro politan areas with more school options, measured by school district fragmentation. i also reexamine the established relationship between income inequality and income seg regation, and i find that the relationship is twice as large among households with chil dren as among those without. together, rising income inequality and school related resi dential priorities led to higher levels and greater increases in income segregation among households with children compared to childless households.
examining differences between households with and without children modifies the current understanding of income segregation over the past several decades and the factors that contribute to it, with important implica tions for researchers and policymakers. rising income segregation between neighborhoods is a story about families with children, demon strating the particularly high stratification of children s contexts. neighborhood effects studies have documented considerable disad vantages associated with growing up in impoverished neighborhoods , and the greater and growing inequality in children s contexts over time suggests growing inequality for future genera tions. recent research documents rising economic disparities in educational outcomes, and rising income segregation in children s contexts may be one explanation for this growing economic inequality.
household c omposition  a nd in co me segreg at io n income segregation between neighborhoods changed little in the 1990s but rose in the 2000s, and both poor and affluent households have become more segregated from all other   at univ california santa barbara on april 29, 2016 asr.sagepub.com downloaded from owens 3 households . studies docu menting the rise in income segregation between neighborhoods have used data on family income , but these data include only family households and exclude single person and other non family households. non family households are increasingly prevalent, accounting for 33 percent of all households in 2010 , and if their income segregation differs from that of family households, the current understanding of income segregation between neighborhoods may be inaccurate. because non family house holds do not have children, 1 their income  segregation may indeed be different. families with children may have different residential resources and priorities than do non family households or family households without chil dren .
income inequality is one key factor  accounting for rising income segregation between neighborhoods from 1970 to 2000 . growing income inequality particularly affected the segregation of affluent families, given that rising incomes at the top of the income distribution primarily drove income inequality . whether income inequality is higher among families with children than among all house holds depends on the measure used. the vari ance of family income was larger from 1975 to 2005 among families with children than among all families ,  while the ratio of household incomes at the 90th and 10th percentiles was higher among all households than among those with children from 1967 to 2008 . both  measures indicate that income inequality grew more among families with children than among all households, suggesting that income segregation between neighborhoods may have risen more among families with children. however, childless households do not incur the financial costs of raising children, so they may have more income to spend on housing ,  weakening the association between income inequality and income segregation.
studies of racial segregation provide  insight into whether income segregation may vary by household composition. marsh and iceland find that households composed of single individuals living alone are less racially segregated from one another than from married couple households. lower income inequality among single person households, compared to inequality between single person and married households, accounts in part for their lower levels of segregation. racial segre gation between neighborhoods among families with children is higher than racial segregation among all households , and school aged children  experience more racial segregation between neighborhoods than do all residents . given the link between race and income, residential income segregation may be higher among families with children than among those without.
more is known about the segregation of  children between schools than between neigh borhoods. school racial segregation declined substantially from the late 1960s through the early 1980s. measures that capture the sorting of students by race between schools show more modest declines since the mid 1980s, but given changes in public school composition, minority children are increasingly exposed to more minority schoolmates . less research doc uments economic segregation between schools. owens, reardon, and jencks find that income segregation between school districts among public school families, and segregation between schools among students eligible and ineligible for free lunch, increased from 1990 to 2010. however, schools tend to be more segregated by race and poverty than are neigh borhoods , so trends in school economic segregation may not accurately describe trends in residential income segregation of families with children. this study provides some of the first evidence on   at univ california santa barbara on april 29, 2016 asr.sagepub.com downloaded from 4 american sociological review  neighborhood income segregation by house hold composition.
resident ial concern s  am o ng h o u s e ho ld s   w i t h  c hi ldren residential decisions are influenced by  resources and available options, and house holds perceive and evaluate their choice sets differently depending on whether they have children . some neighborhood characteristics are attractive to households regardless of composition. for example, households pay more for aesthetically attrac tive neighborhoods, better air quality, low noise pollution, low crime, and proximity to amenities like public transportation, topo graphical features, and the central business district . however, families with children have additional concerns or may weigh amenities differently when choosing where to live.
one particularly important concern shaping parents residential choices is the local structure of school options in terms of school and district attendance boundaries. some met ropolitan areas are composed of many munici palities, each with its own school district. others are composed of just a few school districts that serve multiple municipalities. past research finds that racial segregation between school districts is higher in metro politan areas with greater school district frag mentation . when metropolitan areas are more fragmented between districts, parents have more choices and can more closely match their preferences to the available options, leading to more racial segregation. more fragmentation may also lead to greater income segregation as parents choose to live in neighborhoods in particular districts.
past studies indicate that parents take  schools into account when making residen tial choices. some white and higher income parents use school and neighborhood racial composition as a proxy for school quality when deciding where to live and whether to enroll their children in local public schools . lower income parents may assess schools on the basis of safety, school leadership, and school culture rather than test scores or school composition, and they have less access to information about academic characteristics of schools than do high income parents . furthermore, lower income parents often face considerable housing market constraints in terms of afford ability and limited search time, and they may privilege safety, housing unit characteristics, and proximity to childcare and employment over considerations about schools when mak ing residential moves . these different approaches to residen tial and schooling decisions may lead to high levels of sorting by income between neigh borhoods among families with children. childless households do not face the addi tional constraint of high quality schools when choosing where to live, and thus they may be less segregated between neighborhoods. for example, childless households may be willing to live in diverse neighborhoods with attrac tive amenities located in low quality urban school districts.
school options also shape residential decisions because school quality is capitalized into housing prices, pricing some households out of neighborhoods . studies show that a one standard deviation increase in test scores corresponds to a 1 to 4 percent increase in housing costs, accounting for other neighborhood characteristics that may affect house prices . some childless households may be willing to pay for school quality when buying a home to maximize home values childless households could also be empty nesters who made past decisions with children in mind or young   at univ california santa barbara on april 29, 2016 asr.sagepub.com downloaded from owens 5 couples planning for future children. in general,  however, families with children are willing to pay even more in housing costs than are child less households for residence in areas with higher quality schools . therefore, income segregation  may be higher among families with children, due in part to schooling concerns, as childless households are less likely to pay the premium for a public good they will not use.
residential priorities specific to families  with children may also have shaped trends in  income segregation over the past 20 years in addition to levels. high income and highly educated parents have increased investments in their children s education compared to low ses parents over the past few decades. the class gap has grown in parental time spent in childcare, including managing the activities of school aged children , money spent on children , and enrollment in preschool . this growing class  gap may be due to rising income inequality as well as parents increasing concern about their children getting ahead, starting when children are young what ramey and ramey call the rug rat race. furthermore, research shows that the impact of school characteristics on housing prices increased from 1994 to 2004 . some of  this increase may be due to greater availabil ity of information about schools during this time, particularly following the passage of no child left behind in 2001 . if increasing concern about children s futures and access to information about schools translates into increased willing ness to pay to live in an expensive area asso ciated with greater opportunities for children and higher home prices associated with high quality schools, income segregation may have increased more for families with children than for households that are not sub ject to these growing concerns.hyp otheses and an alyses this article addresses two related research  questions. first, what are the trends in income segregation between neighborhoods by house hold composition to answer this question, i estimate income segregation between neigh borhoods within the 100 largest metropolitan areas in the united states from 1990 to 2010 for households with and without children. research reviewed in the previous sections documents greater growth in income inequal ity and higher racial residential segregation among households with children than among those without increasing economic segrega tion between schools a growing class gap in investments in children and the importance of schooling in residential decision making for households with children. therefore, i hypoth esize that income segregation between neigh borhoods is higher and has risen more among families with children than among childless households. second, what factors account for such differences in income segregation by household composition i hypothesize that school options and income inequality play important roles. to explore the role of school ing, i first estimate income segregation between school districts by household compo sition to see whether trends parallel those of neighborhood segregation, which provides descriptive evidence that districts may struc ture neighborhood segregation. then, i use longitudinal regression analyses to identify the role of income inequality and the structure of school options, operationalized as school dis trict fragmentation, in accounting for differences in residential income segregation between households with and without children over time.
data a nd m et ho d s income data i use income data from the 1990 and 2000 census and the five year estimates from the 2008 to 2012 american community survey to estimate income segregation between neighborhoods.
2 the census and acs provide  counts of households in multiple income cat egories by household composition in each census tract . i examine counts for all households, households without children, and family households with chil dren.
3 i use absolute income and do not adjust  for household size .
to estimate income segregation between  school districts, i use data from the school district demographics system , pro duced by the national center for education statistics . the sdds aggregates cen sus and acs data to the school district level, and i use estimates from the 1990 and 2000 census and the 2008 to 2012 acs.
4 the sdds  provides counts of households in income cat egories in every public elementary or unified school district in the united states by household composition and school enrollment.
5 i estimate income segregation  between school districts for all households, households without children, family house holds with children, and public school fami lies families with at least one child age 3 to 19 without a high school degree enrolled in public school .
estimating income segregation i address the first research question by estimat ing income segregation between neighborhoods within metropolitan areas from 1990 to 2010 for each household type using the rank order information theory index h .
6 h compares the variation in household incomes within neighborhoods to the variation in household incomes within the metropolitan area. the rank order h index extends the  binary h index  by estimating a weighted average of binary h computed at every income threshold . entropy is calculated with the following equation ep pppp logl og22111 1  where p  is the proportion of households with  incomes below a particular income threshold, and entropy is calculated at the neighborhood and metropolitan area levels. entropy is cal culated for every income threshold . binary h is cal culated as the average deviation of each neighborhood s entropy from the metropolitan area entropy weighted by the  number of households   hpte p te pjjj   1   t o estimate the rank order information  theory index h over all income categories, i use the following   he ph pdp 22 01 ln   theoretically , h can range from 0 to 1 . if h is 0,  household income distributions are identical in all neighborhoods and therefore identical to the overall metropolitan area distribution. if h is 1, every household in a neighborhood has the same income as every other household in the neighborhood. i estimate h within metropolitan statistical areas or divisions based on 2003 omb definitions for the 100 most populous msas as of 2010. i calculate segregation within msas, rather than within cities or counties, to capture the fuller set of residential choices for households, including city suburban sorting. i measure segregation between school districts within msas in  1990, 2000, and 2010 using the same method.
segregation can be measured in many ways,  capturing the evenness with which residents of different incomes are sorted between neighborhoods or the exposure of residents to other income groups within neighborhoods . h is an evenness measure, and it  has several advantages over similar measures   at univ california santa barbara on april 29, 2016 asr.sagepub.com downloaded from owens 7 that compare neighborhood variation in income  to total variation in income . because h  relies only on information about households rank in the income distribution rather than their actual income, it is insensitive to inflation and changes in the shape of the income distribution. particularly important here, h does not confound changes in income inequality with changes in income segregation, allowing for an investigation of the relationship between them . h is insensitive to the number or location of thresholds used to define income categories once there are more than a modest number of categories that capture the underlying distribu tion reasonably well. this feature makes h appropriate for comparing income segregation over time and across msas. h also has advantages over evenness measures like the dissimi larity index, commonly used in the racial segregation literature, because it uses informa tion about the entire income distribution rather than measuring segregation between two cate gories .
7 h captures segregation between neighborhoods among either households with or with out children, but these two types of households share neighborhoods. as a supplemental anal ysis, i use exposure indices to estimate the average neighborhood income composition experienced by households with and without children. i categorize households according to national income quintiles . then, i use the two group interaction and isolation indices to generate the average neighborhood composition experienced by households with and without children in each income quintile in the 100 largest msas.
8 together, the evenness  and exposure indices provide a comprehensive picture of neighborhood income segregation for households with and without children.
the role of school options and  income inequality to address the second research question, i  first compare trends in segregation between neighborhoods with segregation between school districts. i operationalize school options in terms of districts rather than schools for conceptual and practical reasons. conceptually, families consider district boundaries when making residential choices between, for example, city and suburban neighborhoods and among neighborhoods in municipalities with multiple districts. if parents take school resources into account when choosing where to live, resource distribution is primarily determined at the district rather than the school level. furthermore, between district segregation accounts for the majority of racial and economic segregation between schools, suggesting that district boundaries are an important segregating mechanism . practically, data limitations necessitate a focus on district rather than school atten dance zone boundaries, although both likely shape residential choices.
9 next, the decomposability properties of h  permit estimates of the proportion of neigh borhood income segregation that lies between districts by dividing neighborhood income segregation within the msa by district segre gation within the msa . the decomposition requires neighborhoods to be defined as geographic units circumscribed entirely within school districts. i link tracts to elementary and unified school district bound aries using the mable geocorr geographic correspondence tool for 2000 and 2010 . mable geocorr pro vides a crosswalk between tracts and school districts based on the proportion of tract pop ulation that lies within a school district. about half of tracts are divided between two or more districts. for tracts that are divided, i multi plied the number of households with and without children in each income category by the population proportion of the tract in the district, creating counts for partial tracts within districts . i estimated income segregation between district tracts within msas to get a measure of total   at univ california santa barbara on april 29, 2016 asr.sagepub.com downloaded from 8 american sociological review  district tract segregation.10  then, i aggregated the district tract income  counts to the district level to estimate income segregation between districts within msas.
11  dividing neighborhood segregation by dis trict segregation provides the proportion of neighborhood segregation that occurs between district boundaries.
finally, moving beyond descriptive analyses, i predict income segregation between neighborhoods among households with and without children, focusing on the roles of school options and income inequality. i use a longitudinal regression model  hc yc y gg c cf fyijti ti t ijt ijt i ij jt           12 3 45 67 8ccf y xx c rr ceij t xijt xijt i jt jt ij       91 0 where hijt is income segregation between  neighborhoods for group i in msa j in year t  . ci is a dummy variable  for group , yt is a vector of dummy  variables for 2000 and 2010, and i include an interaction term between c i and yt. thus, 1 indicates whether segregation was higher among families with children in 1990   2 is a  vector of coefficients capturing whether income segregation changed over time for households without children and   3 indicates  whether changes in income segregation over time were larger or smaller for families with children.
i measure income inequality by estimating  the gini index for group i in msa j in  year t. the gini index is a common measure  of income inequality ranging from 0 to 1, indi cating the extent to which the income distribu tion deviates from a distribution in which everyone has an equal share . i estimated the gini index from categorical census and acs income data using a robust pareto mean estimation procedure developed by von hippel, scarpino, and holas . table 1 shows that income inequal ity is higher among households without children but grows much more among fami lies with children . i include an interaction term between gini and group. therefore,   4 indicates whether changes in income inequality predict changes in income segregation for households without children, and   5 indicates  whether the association between income ine quality and income segregation is larger or smaller for families with children.
the second key independent variable is  school district fragmentation f j, my operationalization of school options, in msa j in 1990.  i measure fragmentation with the herfindahl index, which estimates the probability that two randomly selected students in an msa attend school in different districts, using data on the number of districts and public school enroll ment from the common core of data . the index is estimated in each msa by  dk ddpp   11 , where p is the proportion of  students in the msa enrolled in district d.  theoretically, the index ranges from 0 to 1 . fragmentation has changed little since 1990, so i estimate it only in that year . this also somewhat  mitigates reverse causality concerns  economic and racial segregation may lead to   later district fragmentation, although it is dif ficult to determine how much of the relation ship occurs in each direction . by including interactions between f, y, and c,  i test whether fragmentation accounts for the difference in h between groups in 1990   and whether the difference grows  over time if income segregation increases more in msas with higher district fragmenta tion in 1990 . because i measure   at univ california santa barbara on april 29, 2016 asr.sagepub.com downloaded from owens 9 fragmentation only in 1990, 7 and 8do not  indicate that growth in fragmentation led to  growth in segregation, but that fragmentation sets the stage for greater growth. segregation may increase more in highly fragmented areas because it provides more discrete choices for parents who have increasing resources or growing concerns about their children getting ahead.
i control for factors that potentially confound the relationships of fragmentation and income inequality with income segregation, drawing on past research . for example, increases in unemployment rather than income inequality could account for increases in income segregation or higher racial segregation, rather than fragmen tation, could account for higher income segre gation . x ijt is a vector of group msa year  controls for household demographic and socioeconomic characteristics. i interact the group msa year controls with group. the coefficients for x ijt indicate whether changes in  control variables account for changes in income segregation for households without children the coefficients for  xcijt i index larger or smaller associations for households with chil dren. i also control for private school enroll ment rate , because income segregation  may be lower in places where more households opt out of public schools and thus care less about district boundaries when choosing where to live. i include an interaction with group to test whether private school enrollment rate accounts for segregation more among house holds with children than without.   j represents  msa fixed effects. the appendix describes the   source, construction, and descriptive statistics of control variables.
income segreg at io n  between  n e i g hbo r hoo d s   b y h o u s e ho ld  c o mp osi t io n what are the trends in income segregation between neighborhoods by household compo sition figure 1 presents estimates of income segregation between neighborhoods among all households, childless households, and family households with children from 1990 to 2010 averaged across the 100 largest msas. table   2 presents descriptive statistics.
income segregation between neighborhoods is nearly twice as high among house holds with children as among those without by 2010, average h was .21 among  households with children compared to .11 among those without, a statistically significant difference between populations.
12 past research  estimates average h among all families table 1 . descriptive statistics, school district fragmentation and income inequality 1990 2000 2010  district fragmentation .828    hnc hwc hnc hwc hnc hwc income inequality .431 .390 .443 .409 .436 .427  note hnc denotes households without children hwc denotes family households with children. cells  present means with standard deviations in parentheses.
 at univ california santa barbara on april 29, 2016 asr.sagepub.com downloaded from 10 american sociological review   to be .148   in 2009 , masking  the higher level among families with children. income segregation increased substantially from 1990 to 2010 among families with chil dren but changed little among childless house holds. the average change from 1990 to 2010 among families with children was .038 an increase of over 20 percent compared to no change, on average, among childless house holds. in the metric of h, the increase for fami lies with children is 1.2 standard deviations.
my results indicate that including nonfamily households and examining income table 2 . average income segregation between neighborhoods and between school districts  within msas by household composition, 1990 to 2010 1990 2000 2010 1990 2000 2010 1990 2000 2010 1990 2000 2010  all householdshouseholds    without childrenhouseholds with  children  between neighborhoods    median .121 .119 .125 .108 .106 .106 .168 .176 .205   mean .123 .120 .126 .107 .105 .107 .171 .179 .209    all householdshouseholds    without childrenhouseholds with  childrenpublic school  families between districts    median .042 .045 .046 .030 .031 .031 .069 .072 .077 .075 .079 .088  mean .042 .043 .043 .031 .031 .030 .070 .073 .080 .076 .080 .089  note n  for between neighborhood segregation 100 largest msas. n for between district segregation  95 largest msas with multiple districts.
figure 1. average income segregation between neighborhoods by household composition  in the 100 largest msas, 1990 to 2010  at univ california santa barbara on april 29, 2016 asr.sagepub.com downloaded from owens 11 segregation by the presence of children in the  household is critical to understanding income segregation over the past two decades. past research documenting trends in income segre gation among all families reports little change in the 1990s and an increase since 2000 . my results show that income segregation did rise slightly among families with children in the 1990s past research missed this trend because it is obscured by small declines among house holds without children. the rise in the 2000s is much greater among families with children than among childless households. the increase in residential income segregation over the past two decades occurred almost entirely among families with children. among childless households two thirds of the pop ulation income segregation changed very little. when accounting for rising income segregation, factors specific to families with children must be taken into account.
what are the implications for the neighborhood income composition of households with and without children families with children sort by income between neighborhoods more than households without children, but both types of households share neighborhoods. the low economic sorting among households without children may dwarf the higher economic sorting among households with children, resulting in similar exposure of households with and without children to various income groups. figure 2 presents the average neighborhood income composition experienced by households with and without children in 2010, estimated with interaction and isolation indices. households in each income quintile are indexed on the y axis for households without children   and households with children . the x axis indexes the proportion of all households, regardless of composition, in each income quintile in the average neighborhood for households of that type in that income quintile, summing to 100 percent.
the bottom two bars in figure 2 present  the average neighborhood income composi tion of households with and without children in the highest income quintile. in 2010, the  figure 2. average neighborhood income composition for households with and without  children in the 100 largest msas, 2010  at univ california santa barbara on april 29, 2016 asr.sagepub.com downloaded from 12 american sociological review  average high income household with children  lived in a neighborhood where 10 percent of all households  had incomes in the lowest  quintile and 41 percent had incomes in the top quintile. in contrast, the average high income household without children lived in a neigh borhood where 12 percent of all households had incomes in the lowest quintile and 37 percent had incomes in the top quintile. the average high income household with children thus lived in a neighborhood with slightly more high income and fewer low income neighbors than did the average high income household without children. the average low income household with children lived among slightly more poor and fewer rich neighbors than did the average low income household without children. the top two bars in figure   2  show that the average household with chil dren in the lowest income quintile lived in a neighborhood where 47 percent of house holds were in the bottom two quintiles and 33 percent of households were in the top two quintiles, compared to 44 and 37 percent, respectively, for households without children. overall, figure 2 demonstrates that house holds with children live in slightly more eco nomically homogeneous and segregated neighborhoods than do those without.
compared to neighborhood economic  composition in 1990 , high income families with children experi enced increasingly economically homoge nous neighborhood contexts over time. for example, in 1990, top quintile households with children lived in neighborhoods where high income neighbors comprised 2 percent more of their neighbors compared to childless households this disparity rose to 4 percent by 2010. the disparities in exposure between low income households with and without children remained more stable over time, con sistent with the discussion of segregation across the income distribution in the next sec tion. the focus of this article is evenness and sorting rather than composition, but these analyses provide insight into the differences in neighborhood economic composition by household type.income segregation across the  income distribution h provides a weighted average of segregation  across the income distribution, obscuring changes in segregation at various points in the distribution that may offset one another. past research shows that segregation of families above and below the median income rose fairly steadily, whereas segregation of the poor and of affluent families was flat in the 1990s but rose since 2000 . does this vary by household composition i created segregation profiles that display lev els of segregation at each percentile of the income distribution, averaged across the 100 largest msas. i created the profiles by taking the binary h estimates at each income cate gory threshold, which provide estimates of h across the income distribution, and fitting a polynomial through each binary estimate. coefficients from this model and the distribu tion of households across the income catego ries can be used to predict h at each percentile in the income distribution .
figures 3 and 4 present income segregation  profiles between neighborhoods from 1990 to 2010. h is on the y axis and percentiles of the  income distribution are on the x axis. a given  percentile on the x axis indicates a household s  position in the national income distribution . the solid line in each figure is 1990, the dashed is 2000, and the dotted is 2010. distance between the lines indicates change over time. the u shape for both popu lations indicates that segregation is highest for affluent households, particularly among fami lies with children . segregation of the poor is also higher than segregation in the middle of the income distribution. figure 3, the profile for house holds without children, shows little overall change. figure 4 shows that from 1990 to 2000, income segregation between neighborhoods for families with children increased among the top 80 percent of the income distribution but declined at the bottom. from 2000 to 2010,   at univ california santa barbara on april 29, 2016 asr.sagepub.com downloaded from owens 13 families with children became more segregated  between neighborhoods at every income percentile. comparing 1990 and 2010, the smallest change has been among the bottom quintile of the income distribution. overall, these profiles reveal the high levels of segregation among affluent households with children and emphasize that the increase in income segrega tion between neighborhoods occurred almost exclusively among households with children.
figure 3. income segregation between neighborhoods among households without children  across the income distribution, 1990 to 2010 figure 4. income segregation between neighborhoods among families with children across the income distribution, 1990 to 2010  at univ california santa barbara on april 29, 2016 asr.sagepub.com downloaded from 14 american sociological review  wha t a cco unt s  fo r  diff eren c e s   i n segreg at io n  b y  h o u s e ho ld  t ype  income segregation between neighborhoods  is higher and increased exclusively among families with children, on average, consistent with my hypothesis. i now explore whether the structure of schooling and income inequal ity account for these differences in income segregation between households with and without children. first, i estimate income segregation between school districts to see if trends parallel those of segregation between neighborhoods. if school district boundaries are more relevant to the residential choices of families with children, segregation between school districts will be higher among these households compared to childless house holds.   figure 5 presents  estimates of income  segregation between school districts within msas, averaged across the 95 largest msas with more than one school district, for four populations all households, childless house holds, families with children, and public school families.
13 table 2 presents descriptive  statistics.income segregation between school districts follows a similar pattern to income segre gation between neighborhoods it is higher and has risen more among households with chil dren than among those without. segregation by income between school districts is highest among public school families, for whom dis trict boundaries are most relevant. by 2010, income segregation between districts among public school families was .089, on average, nearly three times as high as segregation among childless households.
14 average segregation between school districts did not change from 1990 to 2010 for households without children. income segregation grew among families with children during the 1990s and 2000s, and the increase was largest for public school families 17 percent, over one quarter of a standard deviation. segregation was about 9 percent higher among public school families than among all families with children in 1990 and about 11 percent higher in 2010. this dif ference suggests that public school options in particular, beyond district characteristics attractive to all families with children, contrib ute to segregation for public school families. the greater increase in segregation among public school families, compared to the  figure 5. average income segregation between school districts by household composition  in the 95 largest msas with multiple school districts, 1990 to 2010  at univ california santa barbara on april 29, 2016 asr.sagepub.com downloaded from owens 15 increase among all families with children, is  consistent with the hypothesis that school options have become a bigger factor in resi dential choice over time.
school districts are administrative units,  but they are also a larger definition of neigh borhoods. therefore, the school district results could merely reflect that families with children increasingly sort between neighborhoods on a large geographic scale, as reardon and bischoff show. to demonstrate that school district boundaries are meaningful distinctions and not just large definitions of neighborhoods, i estimate the proportion of neighborhood segregation occurring between districts, dividing neighborhood segregation by district segregation. table 3 presents the proportion of between neighborhood income segregation within msas that occurred between school districts in 2000 and 2010.
if district boundaries delineate school  options relevant to parents, rather than simply demarcating neighborhoods, a greater proportion of neighborhood segregation will occur between school districts among households with children than among childless households. table 3 shows this is the case. furthermore, during the 2000s, the proportion of neighborhood income segregation occurring between districts increased among families with chil dren and decreased among households without children. this suggests that compared to child less households, families with children place more emphasis on school district boundaries when deciding where to live, and school district boundaries have become an increasingly salient residential sorting device over time among families with children. the results also show that over 60 percent of neighborhood segrega tion occurs within districts, indicating the importance of both districts and school attend ance zones in contributing to residential choice and segregation.
the role of income inequality and  school district fragmentation the trends in income segregation between  neighborhoods and between school districts are consistent, indicating higher segregation and greater growth among families with chil dren compared to childless households. now, i formally test the role of income inequality and the structure of schooling, measured by school district fragmentation, in accounting for these differences. table 4 presents results from the longitudinal regression model described in the methods section. model 1 predicts group msa year income segregation from group msa year income inequality, school district fragmentation in 1990, a series of year and group dummy variables and interaction terms, and msa fixed effects. model 2 adds group msa year demographic and socioeconomic controls, msa year pri vate school enrollment, and interaction terms with group.  the group dummy variable indexes the difference in income segregation between households with and without children in 1990. controlling for income inequality and fragmen tation, there is no significant difference . model 2 indicates that, accounting for con trol variables, income segregation would be lower among families with children. the nega tive coefficients for year indicate that, with full controls, segregation among households without children declined slightly over time. the coefficients for the interaction between group and year indicate that the change in segregation over time is larger among households with children .table 3 . proportion of neighborhood  income segregation occurring between  school districts, 2000 and 2010 2000 2010 all households .323 .326 households without children .291 .268 households with children .348 .380 note n 95 largest msas with multiple  districts.
 at univ california santa barbara on april 29, 2016 asr.sagepub.com downloaded from 16 american sociological review  the coef ficient for income inequality is  significant and positive, indicating that rising  income inequality led to rising income segre gation among households without children. the coefficient for the interaction between income inequality and group is also significant and positive rising income inequality had a larger impact on income segregation among families with children. the total magnitude for families with children is nearly .5 a one point increase in income inequal ity among families with children is associated with nearly a one half point increase in their income segregation. predicted values from model 2 indicate that income segregation among households with children rose twice as much in the 10 msas with the largest increases in income inequality compared to the 10 msas with the smallest increases in income inequality.
this finding refines past understandings of  the relationship between income inequality and income segregation . rising income inequality contributes to income segregation much more among families with children. not only is the relationship between income inequality and income segregation twice as large among table 4 . longitudinal regression predicting group specific income segregation between  neighborhoods, 1990 to 2010 model 1 model 2 group families with children .008  .153   year 2000 .005   .012   year 2010 .001  .012   families with children 2000 .006  .003  families with children 2010 .028  .021   income inequality .160  .232   income inequality families with children .157  .223   fragmentation families with children .039  .028   fragmentation 2000 .002  .001  fragmentation 2010 .003  .012  families with children fragmentation 2000 .010 .014  families with children fragmentation 2010 .014 .023   msa fixed effects x x group msa year controls x group msa year controls group x private school proportion x private school proportion group x constant .038 .025 note msas with only one school district are excluded from analyses . n 570 observations . p .10 p .05 p .01 p .001 .
 at univ california santa barbara on april 29, 2016 asr.sagepub.com downloaded from owens 17 families with children as among childless  households, but income inequality increased much more among families with children. income inequality and income segregation were both fairly flat among childless house holds, but where income inequality did rise, its impact on income segregation was half as large as among families with children. spend ing priorities may lead high income childless households to spend growing resources in dif ferent ways than do families with children. for families with children, the increasing resource gap strongly translated into segregation, perhaps because concerns about children and schools prompted high income households expenditures on mobility to neighborhoods seen as advantageous for children.
i measure school district fragmentation in  1990 and use group and year dummies and interactions to test whether fragmentation accounts for group differences in segregation. i mean center fragmentation to ease interpreta tion. the coefficient for the interaction between group and school district fragmentation is sig nificant and positive across models.
15 income  segregation is higher among households with children than among childless households in all msas, but the difference is even larger in more fragmented places. predicted values from model 2 indicate that in 2010, income segrega tion was twice as large among households with children as among childless households in the 10 most fragmented msas. in the 10 least frag mented msas, households with children were about 1.8 times as segregated as those without. fragmentation thus has a modest effect size.
the interactions between fragmentation and  year and between fragmentation, year, and group are non significant, suggesting similar growth in segregation among households with and without children regardless of fragmenta tion . the descriptive analyses presented earlier indicated that segregation between school districts rose over time, and the proportion of neighborhood segregation occurring between district boundaries increased. however, the multivariate analyses do not strongly support a conclusion that the residential segregation gap increased more in highly fragmented msas.
overall, these results show that rising  income inequality is a more powerful predic tor of income segregation among families with children, for whom income inequality increased much more. families with children have different spending and residential con cerns than do childless households, and the growing resource gap between high and low income parents translated into rising segrega tion among children. the results also show that the higher level of segregation among families with children is due, in part, to school district fragmentation, a more relevant concern for parents that provides a clear structure of possible residential choices. together, rising income inequality and the structure of schooling within which inequal ity plays out combine to contribute to greater and growing income segregation among fam ilies with children.
disc ussio n this article makes several contributions to the current scholarship on income segregation and economic inequality. first, past research documents rising income segregation between neighborhoods , but my analyses by household composition modify this conclusion. the increase in residential income segregation occurred entirely among families with chil dren, for whom income segregation rose by about 20 percent. among childless house holds two thirds of the population income segregation did not change, on average. by 2010, income segregation between neighborhoods among families with children was twice as high as segregation among childless households. my findings reveal that the current narrative of an increasingly unequal metropolis in terms of income segregation is true only for families with children.
 at univ california santa barbara on april 29, 2016 asr.sagepub.com downloaded from 18 american sociological review  second, my findings suggest that explana tions for residential segregation must consider  this variation by household composition. i examine two factors in this article income inequality and the structure of schooling. past research identifies rising income inequality as an important driver of income segregation . my findings show that the relationship between income inequality and income segregation is twice as large among households with chil dren, for whom income inequality rose more. income inequality changed little among child less households during this time period, and households without children may have different residential concerns and spending priori ties, so that income inequality is a less powerful predictor of income segregation. among fami lies with children, high income parents may have become increasingly concerned about their children s well being, or they may have prioritized expenditures on residence in neigh borhoods seen as advantageous for their chil dren, and rising income inequality provided the resources with which to achieve these resi dential goals.
one such residential goal may be to live in a  particular school district. descriptive analyses show that trends in school district segregation by income are consistent with neighborhood segregation trends i found higher levels and greater growth in income segregation between school districts among families with children, particularly public school families, compared to childless households. furthermore, a larger proportion of segregation between neighborhoods can be attributed to segregation between school districts among families with children, rather than among child less households. this indicates that school dis trict boundaries shape the residential choices of households with children, contributing to their higher levels of segregation. multivariate anal yses confirm that segregation among families with children is modestly higher in more highly fragmented places, accounting for part of the gap in segregation levels between households with and without children. past quantitative and qualitative research suggests that schooling concerns shape residential choices, but this article is among the first to document the aggre gate impacts of school related concerns on income segregation. my analyses examine school district fragmentation, but other meas ures of school options and other child related amenities, such as housing options or local social services, are likely relevant and require further investigation.
third, my analyses reveal that segregation  is highest and has risen steadily between neighborhoods among affluent families with children. growing income inequality and concerns about educational advantages for children may contribute to high segregation of affluent families. as the cultural norms around parenting and investments in children have intensified, spending on investments in children has risen among families at the top of the income distribution . my results indicate that real estate is another area where the class gap in investments in children has grown income segregation between high and low income families with children has increased.
this article has implications for several  related fields of study. first, my findings have implications for studies of neighborhood effects, which have demonstrated a link between neighborhood socioeconomic status and a variety of child and adolescent out comes, including psychological well being, test scores, educational attainment, and teen pregnancy . given the widen ing gulf between children s neighborhoods that i document, future neighborhood effects research should adopt a temporal perspective and test whether neighborhood effects have increased over the past few decades as these disparities have grown. this line of inquiry would enrich our understanding of whether absolute or relative neighborhood deprivation matters. furthermore, research should   at univ california santa barbara on april 29, 2016 asr.sagepub.com downloaded from owens 19 continue to examine whether children face  more unequal contexts than adults on other dimensions, including racial segregation and exposure to violence.
second, this study has implications for  understanding growing economic gaps in edu cational achievement and attainment . rising segregation between  both neighborhoods and school districts may account, in part, for the growing economic achievement gap. neighborhoods and school districts serve as social contexts for children, determining public school students class mates and influencing the types of adult supervision and role models children will encounter outside of school. growing segregation among families with children between neighborhoods and, particularly, among public school fami lies between districts since 1990 affects diversity in the composition of district schools. this may lead to inequalities in where teach ers choose to work, how involved parents are in schools, and other contextual resources that contribute to children s outcomes. furthermore, school districts serve as administrative units that determine educational funding and spending, curricular decisions, and school choice options, and rising segregation may lead to inequalities in the local tax and voter bases.
finally, my findings have implications for  policies designed to reduce inequality in chil dren s neighborhood and school contexts. families with children have become more segregated by income between neighborhoods, which suggests that schools may also have become more economically segregated . for decades, school choice policies have been in place to overcome the role of neighborhood racial and income seg regation in creating segregated schools. how ever, nearly all school choice plans operate within school districts, so they do not address the increasing economic homogeneity of school districts documented here. furthermore, within district school choice policies based on socioeconomic status have done lit tle to reduce economic segregation between schools . policy makers need to consider new ideas in break ing the link between neighborhood residence and school attendance to thwart the increasing pace of segregation between neighborhoods, schools, and school districts among families with children. educational policymakers may be able to effect change by redrawing district boundaries to reduce the number and fragmen tation of districts within msas. designing inter district choice plans and strengthening current intra district choice plans may also mit igate inequalities. breaking the link between neighborhood residence and school attendance may also reduce the capitalization of school quality into home prices, facilitating neighborhood income integration. although politically challenging, using school attendance policies to reduce neighborhood and district segregation may be more feasible than reducing income inequality, raising the minimum wage, institut ing metropolitan governance, or creating a large affordable housing stock to address resi dential segregation. many researchers have noted that housing policy is school policy, but school policy can also be housing policy. future research should continue to explore the causes and consequences of segregation between schools, school districts, and neighborhoods by household composition.
 at univ california santa barbara on april 29, 2016 asr.sagepub.com downloaded from 20 american sociological review  append ix multivariate model control variables group msa year control variables are constructed from ipums usa data . table a1 presents descriptive statistics. to obtain metro level estimates with consis tent msa boundaries, i first aggregate the data to the public use microdata area level for the 1990 and 2000 census and 2008 to 2012 acs. then, i use a puma county crosswalk provided by missouri census data center and finally aggregate county level data to 2003 omb defined msas. coun ties span pumas and the crosswalk is based on population proportion. as a check, i com pared non group specific estimates between this method and census data aggregated from tracts. correlations are high . i also ran the longitudinal regression analysis with non group specific covariates and covariate interactions with group, and results are substantively identical for the key independent variables .
because income segregation is estimated  between households, i estimate group specific covariates at the household level for house holds with and without children. i estimate log population of each group, the proportion of householders who are non hispanic black, hispanic, foreign born, or over 65 years old. for the socioeconomic variables, i consider the characteristics of the householder or the house holder s spouse, if present, estimating the pro portion of households where the householder or spouse was unemployed, had at least a bachelor s degree, or worked in manufacturing. i estimate group msa year proportion of female headed households from census and acs data. i constructed the proportion of stu dents enrolled in private school from sdds data.
i constructed racial segregation from tractlevel 1990 and 2000 census and 2008 to 2012 acs data on householder race by household type. these racial categories do not provide race by hispanic origin counts. i estimated segregation between whites and blacks and between whites and all non whites between tracts within msas using the binary h index. regression results are substantively identical regardless of the measure used.
multivariate model results  for 100 largest msas table a3 presents results from the multivariate model presented in table 4. column 1 replicates model 2 from table 4 for the 95 largest msas, providing coefficients for con trol variables and their interactions with group . column 2 presents model 1 for all 100 msas, including those with just one dis trict where fragmentation is by definition zero. results are similar to those presented in table 4. when the full set of controls and control group interactions are included in column 3, the interaction between fragmen tation and group becomes non significant. however, the interaction between fragmenta tion, group, and year 2010 is significant and positive. segregation is higher in 2010 in more fragmented places among families with children. i prioritize results for the 95 msas with more than one district , because low fragmentation scores are intended to capture low distribu tion across districts, not a lack of options as in the one district msas. most importantly, fragmentation scores of zero are statistical outliers that have undue leverage on the model and thus bias results. post estimation diagnostic tools reveal that the five one dis trict msas have higher leverage than the 95 multi district msas, as reflected in the drastic change in the fragmentation group coefficient.
 at univ california santa barbara on april 29, 2016 asr.sagepub.com downloaded from owens 21 table a1 . descriptive statistics for control variables used in multivariate analysis 1990 2000 2010  private school enrollment rate .142 .137 .133    hnc hwc hnc hwc hnc hwc log population 12.545 11.905 12.706 12.023 12.846 12.043  proportion over age 65 .306 .066 .281 .072 .306 .089  proportion female headed households .325 .214 .332 .237 .339 .263  proportion non hispanic black .076 .125 .089 .141 .091 .126  proportion hispanic .041 .095 .056 .132 .065 .156  white black segregation .391 .427 .340 .373 .298 .320  proportion foreign born .068 .112 .087 .163 .091 .192  proportion with a bachelor  s degree .239 .279 .278 .320 .307 .383  proportion unemployed .047 .063 .040 .050 .076 .087  proportion employed in manufacturing .253 .278 .193 .227 .160 .178  note hnc denotes households without children hwc denotes family households with children. cells  present means with standard deviations in parentheses.
table a2 . average neighborhood segregation between households with and without  children in the 100 largest msas 1990 2000 2010 binary h .046  .040   .045   note cells present standard deviations in parentheses.
 statistically significantly different from 1990 statistically significantly different from 2000.
table a3 . longitudinal regression predicting group specific income segregation between  neighborhoods, 1990 to 2010 95 msas  with   1 district all msas group families with children .153  .014  .120   year 2000 .012   .004   .013   year 2010 .012   .0005  .014   families with children 2000 .003 .006  .004     at univ california santa barbara on april 29, 2016 asr.sagepub.com downloaded from 22 american sociological review  95 msas  with   1 district all msas families with children 2010 .021  .029  .025   income inequality .232  .154  .275   income inequality families with children .223  .142  .161   fragmentation families with children .028  .018  .002  fragmentation 2000 .001  .006  .006  fragmentation 2010 .012  .008  .012   families with children fragmentation 2000 .014 .013 .014  families with children fragmentation 2010 .023  .024  .029   log population .016  .018   log population families with children .004  .002  proportion householders over age 65 .012  .009  proportion householders over age 65 families with  children .023 .004  proportion female headed households .324   .283   proportion female headed households families with  children.381  .336   proportion non hispanic black .004 .017  proportion non hispanic black families with children .021  .040   proportion hispanic .200  .215   proportion hispanic families with children .116   .138   white black segregation .044   .040   white black segregation families with children .032  .035   proportion foreign born .092   .133   proportion foreign born families with children .050  .089   proportion with bachelor s degree .065   .037   proportion with bachelor s degree families with children .143  .107   proportion unemployed .001 .009 table a3 .    at univ california santa barbara on april 29, 2016 asr.sagepub.com downloaded from owens 23 acknowledgments the author gratefully acknowledges the guidance of sean  reardon and the contributions of daniel schrage. she also greatly appreciates comments from audiences at the 2014 asa annual meeting the 2014 sea annual meet ing the colloquium on the law, economics, and politics of urban affairs at nyu the stanford center on poverty and inequality young scholars grantee meetings and the ucla ccpr seminar.
funding this research was supported by grant number ae00101 from the u.s. department of health and human services, office of the assistant secretary for planning and evaluation, awarded by the substance abuse mental health service administration. its contents are solely the responsibility of the author and do not necessarily repre sent the official views of the u.s. department of health and human services.
notes  1. over 99 percent of non family households do not include  members under age 18 .
 2. i accessed income data by household type and the presence of children in 2000 and 2008 2012 from social explorer and in 1990 via the national his toric geographic information system .
 3. i use counts by household income for all households and childless households and counts by family income for family households with children using household income for all groups does not apprecia bly change results. i generated income counts for households without children by   combining  counts for non family households and family households without children. data for non family households income by presence of children are not available, so i must count all non family households as childless.
 4. the  sdds collapses the 16 income categories in  the 2008 to 2012 acs to 10. this does not mean ingfully alter results between district segrega tion estimated from 2006 to 2010 acs data, which retain the 16 income categories and include three of the five years in the 2008 to 2012 data, is within .001 or less of results presented in table 2.
 5. the sdds also provides counts for secondary school districts composed of multiple elementary districts. i excluded these districts to assess seg regation between non overlapping districts within metropolitan statistical areas . in 1990, data are missing from several counties in california. estimates excluding california altogether are sub stantively identical to estimates reported here, so i retained available california data in the analyses.
 6. estimates of income segregation can be biased   upward when the population is relatively small com pared to the number of geographic units. following reardon and bischoff , i drew 50 random samples of sample size 50 number of tracts, esti mated h in each sample, and took the mean of these  50 estimates as the population size adjusted estimate of income segregation between neighborhoods.
 7. i estimated the dissimilarity index between poor  and non poor households with and without chil dren. consistent with h, d is higher among house holds with children than among those without . jargowsky also finds a higher d for children than for all residents in 2009.  poor non poor d declined slightly for families with  children in the 1990s and increased in the 2000s, as reflected in figure 4.95 msas  with   1 district all msas proportion unemployed families with children .091  .090  proportion manufacturing .089   .077   proportion manufacturing families with children .082  .070   private school enrollment .015  .012  private school enrollment families with children .066  .063   constant .025 .041 .104  p .10 p .05 p .01 p .001 .table a3 .   at univ california santa barbara on april 29, 2016 asr.sagepub.com downloaded from 24 american sociological review   8. the two group interaction index is estimated as follows   xy iii ix xy tpn            1 , where xi and yi are  counts of members in income quintile x and y. ti is  the tract population, and x is the total population of  income quintile x in the msa. the interaction index estimates the probability that a randomly drawn member of income quintile x shares a neighborhood with a member of income quintile y. the isolation  index subs x i for yi to estimate the probability that  a randomly drawn member of income quintile x shares a neighborhood with another member of x.
 9. historic school attendance boundary data for all msas are not available, preventing the aggregation of census data to these geographic units.
10.   the estimates of segregation between tracts and between district tracts  within metropolitan areas  are correlated at over .9.
11. the aggregation of district tract counts to the district   level provides nearly identical data to the sdds, with differences accounted for by the different aggregation procedures used by sdds and mable geocorr. correlations between income counts at the district level between datasets are greater than .95. i use sdds data for all between district segregation estimates except for the decomposition.
12.   interpreting the magnitude of  h is not particularly  intuitive for comparison, multiracial segregation between tracts measured with h was about .3 in 2000, and black white segregation measured with binary h was about .4 . income  segregation may be lower because the measure of income is imprecise, which affects the segregation measure. furthermore, the measure of racial segre gation is at the individual level, whereas i measure income segregation at the household level.
13.   i  exclude the five msas composed of one school district, where segregation between districts is by definition zero. including these districts does not alter trends in income seg regation between districts but does reduce the level slightly. i present results for the multivariate model including all msas and discuss differences with the main results in the appendix.
14.   for comparison, stroub and richards use the   same method to estimate that student multiracial seg regation between school districts was .165 in 2009.
15.   i ran analyses with an alternative measure of frag mentation number of districts per 10,000 stu dents and the positive and significant coefficient for fragmentation group holds.
references bailey, martha j., and susan m. dynarski. 2011. inequality in postsecondary education. pp. 117 32 in whither opportunity rising inequality, schools, and children s life chances, edited by g. j. duncan and r. j. murnane. new york russell sage foundation.
bainbridge, jay, marcia k. meyers, sakiko tanaka, and  jane waldfogel. 2005. who gets an early educa tion family income and the enrollment of three to five year olds from 1968 to 2000. social science quarterly 86 724 45.
bast, joseph l., and herbert j. walberg. 2004. can parents choose the best schools for their children economics of education review 23 431 40.
bayer, patrick, fernando ferreira, and robert mcmillan.  2007. a unified framework for measuring preferences for schools and neighborhoods. journal of political economy 115 588 638.
bayer, patrick, robert mcmillan, and kim rueben.  2004. an equilibrium model of sorting in an urban  housing market. nber working paper 10865. cam bridge, ma national bureau of economic research.
bianchi, suzanne. 2000. maternal employment and  time with children dramatic change or surprising continuity demography 37 401 414.
bianchi, suzanne, philip n. cohen, sara raley, and kei  nomaguchi. 2004. inequality in parental investment in child rearing expenditures, time, and health. pp. 189 220 in social inequality, edited by k. m. neckerman. new york russell sage foundation.
bischoff, kendra. 2008. school district fragmentation  and racial residential segregation how do bound aries matter urban affairs review 44 182 217.
bischoff, kendra, and sean f. reardon. 2014. residential segregation by income, 1970 2009. pp. 208 233 in diversity and disparities, edited by j. r. logan. new york russell sage foundation.
black, dan, gary gates, seth sanders, and lowell taylor. 2002. why do gay men live in san francisco journal of urban economics 51 54 76.
black, sandra e. 1999. do better schools matter  parental valuation of elementary education. quar terly journal of economics 114 577 99.
brooks gunn, jeanne, greg j. duncan, pamela kato  klebanov, and naomi sealand. 1993. do neigh borhoods influence child and adolescent develop ment american journal of sociology 99 353 95.
chetty, raj, nathaniel hendren, and lawrence f. katz.  forthcoming. the effects of exposure to better neigh borhoods on children new evidence from the moving to opportunity project. american economic review.
clapp, john m., anupam nanda, and stephen l. ross.  2008. which school attributes matter the influ ence of school district performance and demo graphic composition on property values. journal of urban economics 63 451 66.
clotfelter, charles t. 1999. public school segregation  in metropolitan areas. land economics 75 487  504.
dhar, paramita, and stephen l. ross. 2012. school district quality and property values examining differences along school district boundaries. journal of urban economics 71 18 25.
duncan, greg j., ariel kalil, and kathleen m. ziolguest. 2013. increasing inequality in parent incomes   at univ california santa barbara on april 29, 2016 asr.sagepub.com downloaded from owens 25 and children s schooling. unpublished manuscript,  university of california irvine, school of education.
fiel, jeremy e. 2013. decomposing school resegregation social closure, racial imbalance, and racial iso lation. american sociological review 78 828 48.
grady, sarah, and stacey bielick. 2010. trends in the use  of school choice 1993 to 2007 . washington, dc national center for education sta tistics, institute of education sciences, u.s. depart ment of education.
hastings, justine s., richard van weelden, and jeffrey  m. weinstein. 2007. preferences, information, and  parental choice behavior in public school choice. nber working paper 12995. cambridge, ma national bureau of economic research.
von hippel, paul t., samuel v . scarpino, and igor holas.  forthcoming. robust estimation of inequality from binned incomes. sociological methodology.
holme, jennifer jellison. 2002. buying homes, buying  schools school choice and the social construction of school quality. harvard educational review 72 177 206.
iceland, john, kimberly a. goyette, kyle anne nelson, and chaowen chan. 2010. racial and ethnic residential segregation and household structure a research note. social science research 39 39 47.
jargowsky, paul a. 1996. take the money and run  economic segregation in u.s. metropolitan areas. american sociological review 61 984 98.
jargowsky, paul a. 2014. segregation, neighborhoods,  and schools. pp. 97 136 in choosing homes, choos ing schools, edited by a. lareau and k. goyette.  new york russell sage foundation.
jencks, christopher, and susan e. mayer. 1990. the  social consequences of growing up in a poor neigh borhood. pp. 111 86 in inner city poverty in the united states, edited by l. e. lynne and m. g. h. mcgreary. washington, dc national academy press.
jencks, christopher, ann owens, tracey shollenberger,  and queenie x. zhu. 2010. how has rising eco nomic inequality affected children s educational outcomes unpublished manuscript, harvard ken nedy school, cambridge, ma.
johnson, heather beth, and thomas m. shapiro. 2003.   good neighborhoods, good schools race and the good choices of white families. pp. 173 87 in white out the continuing significance of racism, edited by a. w. doane and e. bonilla silva. new york routledge.
kalil, ariel, rebecca ryan, and michael corey. 2012.   diverging destinies maternal education and the developmental gradient in time with children. demography 49 1361 83.
kornrich, sabino, and frank furstenberg. 2013. investing in children changes in parental spending on children, 1972 2007. demography 50 1 23.
krysan, maria. 2002. whites who say they d flee  who are they and why would they leave demography 39 675 96.lareau, annette. 2003. unequal childhoods class,  race, and family life. berkeley university of   california  press.
lareau, annette. 2014. schools, housing, and the reproduction of inequality. pp. 169 206 in choosing  homes, choosing schools, edited by a. lareau and k. a. goyette. new york russell sage foundation.
li, mingche m., and h. james brown. 1980. microneighborhood externalities and hedonic housing prices. land economics 56 125 41.
logan, john r., deirdre oakley, polly smith, jacob  stowell, and brian stults. 2001. separating the chil dren. lewis mumford center working paper. albany suny albany.
logan, john r., deirdre oakley, and jacob stowell. 2008.   school segregation in metropolitan regions, 1970 2000 the impacts of policy choices on public educa tion. american journal of sociology 113 1611 44.
marsh, kris, and john iceland. 2010. the racial residential segregation of black single adults living alone. city community 9 299 319.
massey, douglas s., and nancy a. denton. 1988. the  dimensions of residential segregation. social forces 67 281 315.
minnesota population center. 2011. national historic  geographic information system version 2.0. min neapolis university of minnesota.
missouri census data center. 2012. mable geocorr  geographic correspondence engine. columbia, mo missouri census data center.
nguyen hoang, phuong, and john yinger. 2011. the  capitalization of school quality into house values a review. journal of housing economics 20 30 48.
owens, ann. 2010. neighborhoods and schools as  competing and reinforcing contexts for educational attainment. sociology of education 83 287 311.
owens, ann, sean f. reardon, and christopher jencks.  2014. trends in school economic segregation, 1970  to 2010. cepa working paper. stanford, ca center for education policy analysis.
ramey, garey, and valerie a. ramey. 2010. the rug  rat race. pp. 129 76 in brookings paper on eco nomic activity, edited by d. h. romer and j. wolfers. washington, dc the brookings institution.
reardon, sean f. 2009. measures of ordinal segregation. pp. 129 55 in research on economic inequality. v ol. 17, occupational and residential segregation,  edited by y . fl ckiger, s. f. reardon, and j. silber. bingley, uk emerald group publishing limited.
reardon, sean f. 2011. the widening academic  achievement gap between the rich and the poor new evidence and possible explanations. pp. 91 117 in whither opportunity rising inequality, schools, and children s life chances, edited by g. j. duncan and r. j. murnane. new york russell sage foundation.
reardon, sean f., and kendra bischoff. 2011. income  inequality and income segregation. american journal of sociology 116 1092 1153.
 at univ california santa barbara on april 29, 2016 asr.sagepub.com downloaded from 26 american sociological review  reardon, sean f., glenn firebaugh, david o sullivan,  and stephen a. matthews. 2006. a new approach  to measuring socio spatial economic segregation. presented at the 29th general conference of the international association for research in income and wealth, joensuu, finland.
reardon, sean f., stephen a. matthews, david  o sullivan, barrett a. lee, glenn firebaugh, chad r. farrell, and kendra bischoff. 2008. the geographic scale of metropolitan racial segregation. demog raphy 45 489 514.
reardon, sean f., and ann owens. 2014. 60 years after  brown trends and consequences of school segrega tion. annual review of sociology 40 199 218.
reardon, sean f., and lori rhodes. 2011. the effects  of socioeconomic school integration plans on racial  school desegregation. pp. 187 208 in integrating  schools in a changing society new policies and legal options for a multiracial generation, edited by e. frankenberg and e. debray pelot. chapel hill university of north carolina press.
rhodes, anna, and stefanie deluca. 2014. residential  mobility and school choice among poor families. pp. 137 66 in choosing homes, choosing schools, edited by a. lareau and k. a. goyette. new york russell sage foundation.
rossi, peter h. 1955. why families move a study in  the social psychology of urban residential mobility.  new york the free press.
ruggles, steven, j. trent alexander, katie genadek,  ronald goeken, matthew b. schroeder, and   matthew  sobek.  2010. integrated public use microdata  series version 5.0 machine readable database . minneapolis university of minnesota.
sampson, robert j., patrick sharkey, and stephen w.  raudenbush. 2008. durable effects of concentrated disadvantage on verbal ability among african american children. proceedings of the national academy of sciences 105 845 52.
saporito, salvatore, and caroline hanley. 2014. declining significance of race pp. 64 97 in choosing homes, choosing schools, edited by a. lareau and k. a. goyette. new york russell sage foundation.
sharkey, patrick, and jacob w. faber. 2014. where,  when, why, and for whom do residential contexts matter moving away from the dichotomous understanding of neighborhood effects. annual review of sociology 40 559 79.
stroub, kori j., and meredith p. richards. 2013. from  resegregation to reintegration trends in the racial ethnic segregation of metropolitan public schools, 1993 2009. american educational research journal 50 497 531.
theil, henri. 1972. statistical decomposition analysis,  v ol. 14. amsterdam north holland publishing com pany.
theil, henri, and anthony j. finezza. 1971. a note on  the measurement of racial integration of schools by means of informational concepts. journal of math ematical sociology 1 187 94.
urquiola, miguel. 2005. does school choice lead to  sorting evidence from tiebout variation. american economic review 95 1310 26.
u.s. census bureau. 2014. figure hh 1. trends in the  prevalence of households, 1940 to present. washing ton, dc u.s. census bureau.
watson, tara. 2009. inequality and the measurement  of residential segregation by income in ameri can neighborhoods. review of income and wealth 55 820 44.
western, bruce, deirdre bloome, and christine  percheski. 2008. inequality among american fami lies with children, 1975 to 2005. american socio logical review 73 903 920.
wodtke, geoffrey t. 2013. duration and timing of  exposure to neighborhood poverty and the risk of adolescent parenthood. demography 50  1765 88.
wodtke, geoffrey t., david j. harding, and felix elwert.  2011. neighborhood effects in temporal perspec tive the impact of long term exposure to concen trated disadvantage on high school graduation. american sociological review 76 713 36.
ann owens is an assistant professor of sociology and an affiliate of the spatial sciences institute, population research center, and sol price center for social innova tion at the university of southern california. her research interests include urban sociology, sociology of education, social policy, and social stratification.
 at univ california santa barbara on april 29, 2016 asr.sagepub.com downloaded from 