full terms conditions of access and use can be found at http www.tandfonline.com action journalinformation journalcode reuj20 download by university of nebraska, lincoln date 08 june 2016, at 23 49 international journal of housing policy issn 1461 6718 1473 3269 journal homepage http www.tandfonline.com loi reuj20 a review of socio economic segregation in european capital cities east meets west , edited by tiit tammaru, szymon marcinczak, maarten van ham and sako musterd stephen jivraj to cite this article stephen jivraj a review of socio economic segregation in european capital cities east meets west , edited by tiit tammaru, szymon marcinczak, maarten van ham and sako musterd, international journal of housing policy, doi  10.1080 14616718.2016.1189410 to link to this article http dx.doi.org 10.1080 14616718.2016.1189410 published online 07 jun 2016.
submit your article to this journal  view related articles  view crossmark data book review socio economic segregation in european capital cities east meets west, edited by tiit tammaru, szymon marcinczak, maarten van ham and sako musterd,london and new york, routledge, 2016, isbn 13 978 1138794931 this edited volume paints a detailed picture of spatial socio economic segregation in 13 european cities. the editors introduction and conclusion make a novel, direct comparison between these cities and each city focused chapter provides a thoroughdescription of the historical trends and patterns of spatial segregation. readers willbe left with an understanding of where the most and least af uent areas are withineach city and the extent to which spatial inequalities have changed over time. thebook rarely strays away from description and the reader is left to think why does itmatter the analysis would have been more powerful if the consequences of highand increasing levels of spatial segregation for individual and societal outcomes were more clearly explored in the conclusion. the book claims to provide a set of theoretically informed, methodologically sound, and policy and planning relevantsystematic comparative studies that provide new evidence of the changing levelsand patterns of socio economic segregation across a diverse set of european cities . what follows is a description of where i believe the book lacks in thesedomains.
theory the analysis in many of the chapters strays into describing patterns of ethnic segregation and some chapters conclude by suggesting that increased ethnic segregation is more of a concern than increased socio economic segregation. the link betweenthe two is never fully explored in any chapter and certainly not in the introductionor conclusion to the book, which emphasises the key structural indicators shapingsocio economic segregation as globalisation, social inequalities, welfare regimesand housing systems. while these, as well as discrimination, may also be importantin shaping ethnic segregation, this is not explored in detail in any chapter.
the editors furthermore claim that most of the existing literature on segregation focuses on ethnic rather than socio economic segregation. this is not the case.
many papers may not have explicitly referred to socio economic segregation, butthe spatial concentration of poverty was a very active area of research during the2000s and many academic works were used as the basis for policy interventions tocorrect housing market problems in deprived areas, especially in the uk and thenetherlands. moreover, the editors and chapter authors should have gone further tointernational journal of housing policy , 2016 http dx.doi.org 10.1080 14616718.2016.1189410 downloaded by university of nebraska, lincoln at 23 49 08 june 2016  engage with other theories that explain the processes that cause segregation, for example, counter urbanisation or re urbanisation, rather than focussing on socialmobility and immigration. it is also not clear from the evidence in the book whetherresidential segregation is worse than, for example, workplace segregation.
method the methods used in most chapters are similar. the introduction provides a useful description of three measures of segregation applied by the editors in their cross country analysis and in many other chapters in the book. it is unfortunate that theseindices are inconsistently referred to in the rest of the book. for example, the indexof isolation is sometimes described as ii and other times as p  c3. this is confusing to the reader.
as well as a lack of engagement with theory on the processes that bring about segregation, there is no detailed decomposition analysis of the factors that can causea city to be more or less segregated . such an analysis would allow a more clearer linkto how planners and policy makers might intervene to correct increased segrega tion. for example, if most of the increased segregation is a result of in situ change, policies to encourage social mixing through internal migration might not be effective.
the chapters use measures of income, occupation and education to determine socio economic segregation, yet there is very little discussion as to whether theseare the best measures of socio economic position. the meaning of occupation andeducation will vary between generations, for example, the value of having a degreeor a non manual occupation changes. therefore, using data on people of all agesmight hide differences between and within generations. the editors are open to thecriticisms that using any measure to compare data cross nationally is problematic.
however, the editors reliance on different measures to compare different countries is particularly limiting, especially the lack of more recent data for milan , as well as the different size geographies used in each country to make thecomparisons.
policy the implications for housing policy are not clear because it is not certain whether increased socio economic segregation is bad for either individuals or populations based on the analyses presented in the book you are left to assume that is the case.furthermore, one might expect that because socio economic segregation is not nearlevels seen in other parts of the world, they may be reversible. this is somethingyou take from reading between the lines of the conclusion because there are fewclear recommendations for planners or policy makers. it is therefore not at all clear2 book review downloaded by university of nebraska, lincoln at 23 49 08 june 2016  whether a reversal of policies of privatised housing markets, reduced welfare spending, greater social inequalities or more globalised cities would actually lead to moreor less segregation. this is because there is not a dramatic shift but rather a trend ofgreater polarisation, and not even in all cities. the change in segregation that the authors focus on the most is the spatial separation and isolation from one another of the wealthiest and poorest socio economic groups. there is discussion on the extentto which this change is merely a function of the change in size of these groups,especially the poorest, but almost no discussion on the policy reaction to counter it.it would appear that spatial segregation is driven by increased socio economicinequality and not by something that can be corrected by housing policy alone.
despite these limitations, the book will be useful for researchers who are interested in spatial segregation in any of the cities featured in the book. the book presents the problems of small area comparisons internationally and provides a worthy attempt of differences in spatial segregation in europe.
stephen jivraj research department of epidemiology and public health, university college london, london, uk email stephen.jivraj ucl.ac.uk  c2112016, stephen jivrajinternational journal of housing policy 3 downloaded by university of nebraska, lincoln at 23 49 08 june 2016  