income segregation between school districts and inequality in students  achievement ann owens1 abstract large achievement gaps exist between high and low income students and between black and white students.
this article explores one explanation for such gaps income segregation between school districts, which cre ates inequality in the economic and social resources available in advantaged and disadvantaged students  school contexts. drawing on national data, i find that the income achievement gap is larger in highly segregated metropolitan areas. this is due mainly to high income students performing better, rather than low income children performing worse, in more segregated places. income segregation between districts also contributes to the racial achievement gap, largely because white students perform better in more economically segregated places. descriptive portraits of the school districts of high and low income students showthat income segregation creates affluent districts for high income students while changing the contexts oflow income students negligibly. considering income and race jointly, i find that only high income white families live in the affluent districts created by income segregation black families with identically high incomes live in districts more similar to those of low income white families. my results demonstrate that the spatialinequalities created by income segregation between school districts contribute to achievement gaps between advantaged and disadvantaged students, with implications for future research and policy.
keywords class inequality, race, segregation, achievement gap, poverty and education, quantitative research on education, school catchment zones, politically defined school boundaries educational inequalities between high and lowincome children have grown in recent decades.the gap between high and low income students  test scores is about 40 percent larger among children born in the early 2000s than among thoseborn in the 1970s , and the gapbetween high and low income young adults educational attainment and college enrollment has also grown . educational success affects many adult outcomes. educational achievement and attainmentgaps between high and low income youth may thus lead to greater inequality in future outcomes, like employment, income, neighborhood residence,criminality, and health. the income achievement gap has emerged as a growing problem requiringexplanation and solutions.
one possible explanation for income achievement gaps is income segregation between children sschool contexts. like the income achievement gap, 1university of southern california, los angeles, ca, usa corresponding author  ann owens, department of sociology, university ofsouthern california, 851 downey way, mc 1059, losangeles, ca 90089 1059, usa.
e mail annowens usc.edusociology of education xx 1 27  c211american sociological association 2017 doi 10.1177 0038040717741180 journals.sagepub.com home soesegregation of public school families by income between school districts has also increased, byover 15 percent from 1990 to 2010 . when families are highly segregated by income between school districts,resources that contribute to students academic success, such as school funding, teacher quality, parents social capital, and students peer characteristics, are more unequally distributed. in segregated places, high income students have access to highlyadvantaged districts, whereas low income students attend school in disadvantaged districts. income segregation between districts may contribute to theincome achievement gap by boosting high income students achievement and or reducing low income students test scores.
while inequality between high and lowincome children has increased, educational dispar ities between black and white students have remained stable but substantively large . white and black students are highly segregated between schools and school districts , anda key distinction between the schools of white and black students is that white students are exposed to many fewer poor classmates . income segregation creates very high income and very low incomedistricts, and white families can better afford to live in affluent districts than can black families, on average. even among families with identicalincomes, black families may live in lower income areas than white families due to racialized housing search processes and discrimination . therefore, income segregation may also contribute tothe racial achievement gap.
in this article, i examine whether income achievement gaps are larger in metropolitan areaswith greater income segregation between school districts. my results indicate that this is the case, primarily because the benefit of high familyincome for students achievement is larger in highly segregated places. then, i investigate the intersection of race and income. i find that the achievement gap between black and white students is also larger in places where income segre gation between districts is higher. my analyses document how contextual inequality augments family advantage or disadvantage, and i assessincome segregation as one potential explanation for educational disparities.family income and children s test scores since the equality of educational opportunity report , scholars have investigated the socioeconomic status of children s families as a key predictor of their achievement.past research, challenged by the difficulties of esti mating causal effects, provides mixed evidence on the magnitude, timing, and duration of the effect of family income on children s educational out comes . more recently, researchers have used exogenous shocks to family income due to transfer and welfare programs togenerate causal estimates. these studies convergearound a similar estimate an additional 1,000 in family income among low income families corresponds to a 5 to 7 percent standard deviationincrease in children s test scores .
why does family income matter two general pathways have been proposed . first, income has direct effects by increasing the resources invested in children. family income providesfor basic child well being, such as food, clothing,shelter, childcare, and health care, as well as investment in child enrichment .second, income can have indirect effects on children that operate through family processes. higher income can reduce parental stress or improveparental health, resulting in better parenting prac tices and role modeling. research finds more support for the direct effects pathway, indicating that increased income leads to expenditures on childwell being that promote academic achievement.
one family expenditure that affects children s outcomes is purchasing a residence in a particular neighborhood. living in disadvantaged neighbor hoods reduces cognitive test scores . for example, among black children in chicago, sampson, sharkey, and raudenbush found that growing up in a highly disad vantaged neighborhood reduced verbal ability by the equivalent of missing nearly a year of school.
one way neighborhoods may affect children seducational achievement is via their link to local2 sociology of education xxschools. non neighborhood options haveincreased in recent decades, but about three quarters of schoolchildren still attend their neighborhood school . neighbor hoods remain strongly linked to school districts .
nearly all school choice and student assignment plans operate within districts in 2008, fewer than 1 percent of public school students attendedschool in a different district than where they lived . therefore, high income children may outperform low income children becausetheir family income provides access to residence in an advantageous school district that low income parents cannot afford.
segregation between school districts and unequal resources in this article, i focus on income segregation between school districts in the metropolitan area where a child lives. income segregation betweenschool districts creates inequalities in economic and social resources linked to students achievement in highly segregated places, high incomechildren access more resources and low income children access fewer resources. first, school spending varies across districts. a substantial por tion of school funding draws on local revenues based, in part, on district property taxes. higherincome districts typically have greater propertywealth and thus greater local revenues. since the1970s, nearly all states have reformed the role of local revenues in school finance, but many states still have regressive school finance systems inwhich high income districts receive more resources than do low income districts due to revenues from income and sales taxes . income segregation creates concentrations of very low income students, and these concentrations may raise the cost of pro viding safe environments, schools in good physicalcondition, and high quality teachers . few states have sufficient compensatory funding to produce the sameoutcomes for a poor student in a low income compared to a high income district . scholars debate whether school spendingcontributes to students achievement , but recent comprehensive causal evidence indicates that higher per pupil spending increasesstudents educational attainment and future economic outcomes . other research indicates that the test score gap between advantaged and disadvantaged students is smaller when school funding is more equalacross high and low income districts . in summary, income segregation between school districts may contribute to the income achievement gap byexacerbating inequalities in spending in high and low income students school districts.
second, income segregation between districts creates inequality in the social resources available in high and low income students districts. the income composition of a district determines stu dents school peers. the majority of income segregation between schools in a metropolitan area is due to segregation between districts . that is, schools are homogenously lowincome mainly because districts are homogenous  no amount of within district integration will create diverse schools if segregation between districts ishigh. school composition may affect student achievement because it shapes school environment, parent involvement and social capital, student teacher interactions, and peer interactions . there is debate over whether schoolsattended by disadvantaged students produce worselearning outcomes . however, schwartz provides causal evidence thatlow income children s achievement growth is larger in higher income than in lower income schools, and reardon s analyses of morethan 200 million state accountability test scores show that students in affluent districts gain almost one more year of proficiency than students in thepoorest districts. school district segregation also creates inequality in nonschool social contexts that may affect educational success, including theprevalence of adult role models and monitoring orsafety, as the neighborhood effects literature describes .
income segregation and racial inequality income achievement gaps have grown over the past several decades, and achievement gaps between black and white students remain large and troubling.1since 1990, white students haveowens 3scored nearly a standard deviation higher on reading and math achievement tests than black stu dents . one factor in the racial achievement gap is poverty segregation between schools .because black students have lower family incomesthan white students, on average, racial segregation between schools results in stark differences in school poverty rates between black and white stu dents. black students attend schools with poverty rates that are, on average, double that of white students schools .
income segregation creates districts of concentrated poverty or affluence, but high income black families may be less likely than high income whitefamilies to live in the affluent districts created by income segregation. black households live in lower income neighborhoods than do white house holds with similar incomes . in 2009, white middle income households lived in neighborhoods with median incomes over 10,000 higher than black households withidentical household incomes . racial discrimination and prejudice in the housing market, racial differences in wealth, andracially stratified residential preferences and locational networks contribute to these disparities . black middle class neighborhoodsalso tend to be geographically proximate to low income neighborhoods, unlike white middleincome neighborhoods . school districts encompass larger geographic areas than singlecensus tracts, so black middle or high income families may live in predominantly lower income school districts even when they live in higher income neighborhoods. additionally, low income black families may be more disadvantaged by income segregation than low income white fami lies, because low income black families tend to live in higher poverty areas than do white families with similar incomes . therefore, income segregation may contrib ute to the racial achievement gap by exacerbating inequalities in the school contexts black and white families experience.
contextual advantages and disadvantages i hypothesize that income segregation contributes to income and racial achievement gaps because, in highly segregated metropolitan areas, familyadvantage may be amplified by residence in highly resourced school districts, or family disadvantagemay be exacerbated in very poor school districts.
2 past research examines the impact of racial segregation on the black white educational achievementgap , and the literature indicates that attending a school with more black peers is detrimental for black and, to a lesser degree, white students . less research examines the relationship between income segregation and achievement gaps. most relevant to this study,mayer and quillian show that income segregation between neighborhoods contributes to an educational attainment gap betweenhigh and low income children. quillian finds that segregation of poor and nonpoor households between neighborhoods reduces the likelihood ofhigh school graduation for poor students but hasno effect for nonpoor students. mayer reports that higher between neighborhood segregation boosts the educational attainment of children in the tophalf of the income distribution while reducing attainment for those in the bottom half.
these studies consider the impact of segregation for both advantaged and disadvantaged youth, but most research does not, focusing on effects either for all students or only for disadvantagedstudents. in a review of research on school sessegregation and its impact on science and math scores , only 5 of the 59 articles reviewed reported results acrossthe ses spectrum, producing mixed results . my analyses exam ine whether advantaged students benefit from, or disadvantaged students are harmed by, income segregation, as both outcomes contribute toachievement gaps.
alternative explanations i argue that income segregation between school districts contributes to income and racial achievement gaps by exacerbating inequalities betweenadvantaged and disadvantaged children s districts.
here, i consider several alternative explanations.
selection studies of contextual effects on individual outcomes must address selection bias. for example,4 sociology of education xxfamily characteristics, like income or parental education, contribute to school district choice as wellas to children s achievement, introducing bias in the estimation of district effects. examining the association between achievement and segregationbetween districts in metropolitan areas, ratherthan district composition, reduces concerns about selection bias . families typically choose metropolitan areas for jobs, fam ily ties, or history with the area, and these characteristics are less confounded with children s outcomes. that said, high income families of high achieving students may be attracted to segregated metropolitan areas because of the affluent districts segregation creates.
reverse causality the causal relationship between income segregation and achievement gaps may operate in both directions. preexisting achievement differencesbetween school districts may contribute to inequality in housing costs between districts and may shape residential outcomes as parents strive tolive in the best school district they can afford . the relationship is likely cyclical, with income segregationleading to achievement gaps that reify income segregation for future generations through housing market and search processes. disentangling thiscycle is challenging with observational data. simi lar research has used municipal government fragmentation prior to the study period as an instrument for racial or economic segregation, providing evi dence that segregation does contribute to inequality in children s educational outcomes . identifying robustinstruments is challenging, however.
confounders several confounding characteristics of metropolitanareas may contribute to both income segregationbetween districts and achievement gaps. first, income inequality increases income segregation between neighborhoods, schools, and school dis tricts by creating larger gaps in the housing that high and low income families can afford . income inequality may contribute to achievement gaps through pathways aside from income segregation, like inequality in parentalspending on children . second, more racially diverse and racially segregated metropolitan areashave greater income segregation, due to racial dis parities in income and because racial diversity andsegregation shape the residential patterns of highincome families . racial diversity and segregation may also affect achieve ment gaps in ways that income segregation doesnot, for example, by reifying stereotypes aboutminority students that dissuade higher quality teachers from teaching in racially isolated lowincome districts . third, i must dis entangle income segregation from income level ina metropolitan area. metropolitan areas with higher median income have higher income segregation.
the absolute level of resources in a metropolitanarea may raise minimum test scores by providingbasic resources in low income districts. finally,greater private school enrollment share in a metropolitan area may reduce income segregation among public school families as high income families par ticularly sensitive to school composition opt out ofthe public system . greater private school enrollment may also shape the public school income achievement gap by removing high income high achievers. i accountfor these confounders in my analyses.
my findings show how income segregation moderates the association between achievementand income or race. i posit that income segrega tion is one pathway through which achievement gaps between advantaged and disadvantaged groups occur. given the challenges that selection,reverse causality, and confounding variables pres ent, my findings provide evidence consistent with,but not definitively demonstrating, a causal relationship between income segregation between school districts and achievement gaps.
data and methods test score, family income, and child race data this study investigates whether test score gaps by income and race vary by the level of income seg regation between school districts within metropolitan areas. the panel study on income dynamics , a national longitudinal study of familiessince 1968, provides information on familyincome, children s race, children s test scores,owens 5and metropolitan area of residence, allowing examination of the relationships of interest. the psid child development supplement col lected test score data on children ages 0 to 12 years old in 1997, with two follow up studies. i predict children s test scores from the cds ii, collectedin 2002 to 2003, when the original cds subjects were school age. children s achievement was measured with the woodcock johnson revisedtest of achievement, a commonly used assess ment with standardized scoring protocols that provides a measure of reading and math skills normed to the national average for the child s age. readingscores come from a combination of the letterword and passage comprehension tests math scores come from the applied problems tests.table 1 presents descriptive statistics. the cds ii collected assessment data from about 2,500children my analytic sample includes about 1,200 children because it is limited to public school children living in metropolitan areas whowere assessed in the cds i.
the longitudinal psid collects rich information on children s families, including repeatedmeasures of family income. i average family income from the child s birth until the cds ii, when children took the math and reading assess ments.
3lifetime income provides a more complete portrait of family resources than does a single year, and it accounts for sudden changes or misreporting . i measure lifetime familyincome in continuous dollars as well as categorizing families by income quintiles, based on the u.s. incomedistribution in 2002. child race, reported by the primary caregiver, is categorized as non hispanictable 1. descriptive statistics.
variable mean or proportion standard deviation dependent variables math standardized score 101.640 17.826 reading standardized score 101.910 16.918 key independent variables lifetime mean family income 57,588 53,522 income segregation between school districts 0.069 0.045 individual control variables child race white 0.426 black 0.459 hispanic 0.077 asian 0.013 other race 0.024 male 0.510 t wo parent household 0.635 number of siblings 1.327 1.111 y ears of parent education 13.375 2.648 parent expects child to get ba 0.616 cds i math score 104.386 18.019 cds i reading score 103.581 17.941 msa control variables income inequality 0.432 0.022 proportion black 0.179 0.127 proportion hispanic 0.115 0.142 multiracial segregation between school districts 0.200 0.126 median household income 53,931 12,142 private school enrollment share 0.115 0.042 note n 1,202 children, 170 msas. child and family variables from the panel study on income dynamics msa control variables from the 2000 census. cds child development supplement msa metropolitan statistical area.6 sociology of education xxwhite, non hispanic black, hispanic, nonhispanic asian, and non hispanic other race.the racial composition of the sample reflects the oversample of black families in the psid.
4 income segregation between school districts the psid collects information about where children live. via a restricted use license, i identified the metropolitan statistical area in which a child lived at the cds ii. i estimate income segregation between elementary or unified school districts in subjects msas withdata from the school district demographic system , produced by the nces. sdds provides counts of families in 16 income categoriesin each school district based on 2000 censusdata. i estimate segregation among families who enroll at least one child in public school, which captures disparities in tax base as well as studentbody composition and available parent and peer resources. analyses measuring segregation of all households produce substantively identical results.
i estimate segregation with the rank order information theory index h, which captures how evenly families sort by income between schooldistricts within msas. this index considers the entire income distribution, rather than just segregation between poor and nonpoor families. h compares the variation in family incomes withinschool districts to the variation in family incomes within the msa . hextends the binary information theory index by esti mating entropy of each district and its msa for every income threshold with the following equation  ep 5plog 21 p112p log21 12p 1  where pis the proportion of families with incomes below each income threshold. binary his calculated as the average deviation of each district sentropy, e j, from the msa entropy, e, weighted by the number of households  hp 512x jtjejp  te p 2 to estimate the rank order information theory index hover all income categories, i use the following  h52ln 2 1 0ep hp dp 3  theoretically, hcan range from 0 to 1, with 0 representing no segregation and 1 representing complete segregation .
analytic approach i examine the relationship between income segre gation and the income achievement gap using the following equations  y ij5b0j1b1jincij1bkxijk1eij 4  where yijis the reading or math score of student i in msa j,incijis the average lifetime family income of the student , and xis a vector of k individual controls, described below. one important control variable is a child s test score fromthe cds i in 1997. the model therefore predictstest scores net of earlier achievement.
i use a multilevel model to allow the effect of family income to vary as a function of between district income segregation  b 0j5g001g01segj1g0kcjk1e0 5  b1j5g101g11segj1g1kcjk1e1 6  both the intercept and the coefficient for income are predicted from the level of income segregation between districts in msa j . i report the key coefficient g11as an interaction term between family income and segrega tion. i hypothesize that the interaction term willbe positive the income achievement gap is larger in more segregated places because higher income students perform better and or lower income stu dents perform worse in highly segregated msas.
i include msa level confounders of income segregation, c jk, described below. i also examine how income segregation predicts the racial achievement gap by interacting child race, rather than family income, with income segregation betweenowens 7districts. i limit this analysis to comparisons between non hispanic white and black studentsdue to sample size.
my analysis sample includes 1,202 children in 170 msas  this includes 35 msas with only one subject. the litera ture on multilevel models provides varying recom mendations on the number of observations percluster and the number of clusters needed to obtainunbiased results . researchers concur that the num ber of clusters is more important than cluster size for obtaining unbiased results. bell, ferron, and kromrey show that resultsfrom models with cross level interactions are notbiased by clusters with a small sample size, evena sample size of one, as long as the number of clus ters is modestly large. i estimated models on thefull analytic sample, as well as limiting the sample to msas with at least 5 or 10 children . results are substantively identical. resultsmay generalize more to large msas, from whichthere are more children in the sample.
control variables i control for child and family characteristics asso ciated with family income and test scores, includ ing child s race , child s sex, family structure , number of siblings, parent education , and whether the parent expects the child to com plete a bachelor s degree.
5i control for children s previous test scores, capturing how income segre gation shapes achievement net of earlier testscores. in the 1997 cds i, children ages 3 to 12completed the letter word and applied problems tests. because the cds i did not assess children under age 3, this limits the analytic sample to chil dren ages 8 and older in the cds ii. to account forthe msa level confounders discussed previously,i control for income inequality racial composition multiracial seg regation of black, white, hispanic, asian, and other race students between school districts medianhousehold income and private school enrollment share, using 2000 census data. i use multiple imputation to generate 20 plausible data sets thatreplace missing values . following von hippel , i exclude imputations of the dependent variable in analyses.
results income segregation and income gaps in math and reading achievement table 2 presents results from multilevel models predicting children s math and reading achievement from their lifetime average family income and income segregation between school districts in their msa, controllingfor their prior test scores, race, sex, family compo sition, parent education, and parent expectations.model 1 predicts math or reading score from family income with individual controls . the coefficient for family income is signif icant but verysmall every 10,000 increase in average lifetime family income corresponds to roughly a 0.2 point test score increase, about 1 percent of a standarddeviation. this is much smaller than the effectfound in past research, demonstrating the challenges of isolating the causal effect of income.
6i do not focus on estimating causal effects ofincome instead, i focus on one pathway throughwhich family income operates, exploring howthe association between family income and achievement varies across msas with various levels of income segregation between districts.
model 2 adds income segregation between school districts among public school families, which does not significantly predict reading ormath achievement. model 3 interacts income seg regation between districts with family income.
examining only interaction terms coefficients and standard errors is insufficient for interpreta tion . the mar ginal effect of family income on achievementcould be significant at some levels of income segregation even if the interaction term is nonsignificant. estimates of marginal effects and their corre sponding standard errors from model 3 indicatethat the association between family income and8 sociology of education xxmath achievement varies significantly by level of income segregation. in integrated msas, i find no significant association between family income and math achievement, but in highly segregated msas, family income positively and significantly predicts math achievement. marginal effects esti mates show that family income does not significantly predict reading achievement at any level of income segregation without accounting for msa confounders.
model 4 controls for msa income inequality, racial composition, racial segregation between districts, median household income, and private school enrollment share to better isolate the role of income segregation between districts. figure 1 plots marginal effects of family income on mathachievement by income segregation percentile , defined by the analysis sample, from model 4. below approximately the median level of income segregation, family income is not associated with math scores , but in more segregated msas, the association between income and mathachievement is significant and positive. the figure for reading achievement is similar.
the association between family income and students achievement increases as income segrega tion between districts rises. this positive interaction indicates that the income achievement gap is larger in metropolitan areas with higher levels ofincome segregation, where more high income families live in districts with other high income families and more low income families live in districts with other low income families.
exploring trade offs of income segregation income segregation between districts could contribute to the income achievement gap by boosting the achievement of high income children, reducing the achievement of low income children, or both. iexplore this in figures 2 and 3, which present predicted values of math and reading scores, respectively, on the y axis against income segregationtable 2. multilevel regression models predicting t est scores from family income, income segregation between school districts, and their interaction.
variable model 1 model 2 model 3 model 4 math scores family income 0.235 0.216 20.198 21.853   income segregation between school districts 7.643 215.709 25.293   family income 3income segregation 4.105 7.347    msa controls y constant 56.974 56.723 57.878 79.419 reading scores family income 0.221y0.229 0.144 0.528   income segregation between school districts 27.531 212.932 254.974y   family income 3income segregation 0.944 6.707    msa controls y constant 43.210 43.508 43.838 45.639 note all models include individual controls . model 4 controls for msa income inequality, racial composition and segregation, median income, and private school enrollment share. full model parameters are presented in the appendix. n 1,202 children in 170 msas. msa metropolitan statistical area y yes .
yp c20.10. p c20.05. p c20.01.owens 9figure 1. marginal effects of family income on math achievement by income segregation between school districts.
note black line estimates marginal effects from table 2, model 4 gray dashed lines represent 95 percent confidence interval.
figure 2. predicted math scores by family income quintile and income segregation between school districts.
note estimates from model similar to table 2, model 4, but categorizing family income by national income quintiles instead of continuously. all covariates held at their mean value. in all figures, income segregation percentiles are defined by the sample.10 sociology of education xxbetween districts . the predicted values come from models like model 4 in table 2, with individual and msa level controls. instead of measuring family income continuously, i catego rize families according to 2002 national incomequintiles, with one line representing each income quintile. i predict scores at various percentiles of segregation in the sample.
for math, high family income is increasingly advantageous as income segregation increases.students from affluent families, with incomes in the top quintile , achieve higher test scores in more segregated met ropolitan areas. achievement among the lowest income children changes little as income segregation increases. for reading , the story looks different. income segrega tion appears both advantageous for affluent stu dents and disadvantageous for the lowest income students .
to further test these results, i compared the test scores of affluent children and poorchildren to all others. the top panel of table 3 presents resultscomparing affluent children to all others. model 1,which includes only individual level controls, shows that affluent students perform better than lower income students in reading and math.model 2 adds income segregation and its interaction with income quintile. marginal effects plots from model 2 indicate that family affluence isassociated with higher math achievement at high levels of income segregation , but family affluence is not associated withreading achievement at any level of income segregation without accounting for covariates of msa income segregation. this reflects that affluentfamilies live in significantly higher income, more racially diverse, and more economically unequal msas than do lower income families.
model 3 adds msa controls. the positive interaction terms and marginal effects estimates indicate the gaps in reading and math achievement between affluent children and all others is larger inmsas where income segregation between districts is higher. figure 4 plots the relationship between income segregation and math scores for affluentchildren compared to children with family incomes in the bottom four income quintiles . at the lowest levelsof income segregation , affluent children s math achievement is actually slightly lower than that of lower income children, figure 3. predicted reading scores by family income quintile and income segregation between school districts.
note estimates from model similar to table 2, model 4, but categorizing family income by national income quintiles instead of continuously. all covariates held at their mean value.owens 11although the comparison group includes children with incomes up to the 80th percentile of the national income distribution. beyond the median level of income segregation in the sample, affluentchildren increasingly score higher than all lowerincome children, including middle class children.
at the highest level of between district incomesegregation in the sample, the gap between affluent and lower income children s math achievement is one standard deviation. as income segre gation rises, the math achievement of children in the lower 80 percent of the income distribution changes little, although this may mask heterogeneity within the bottom 80 percent.
figure 5 shows that income segregation contributes to the income achievement gap in reading both because high income children s  achievement is higher and because lower incomechildren s achievement is lower in more segregated metropolitan areas. future research should examine these differences in con textual effects for math and reading. perhaps math achievement depends more on formal instructionthan does reading achievement. districts of concentrated affluence might provide advanced curricular or instructional resources, whereas districts with lower income students might provide sufficientresources for a minimum level of math achievement across segregation levels.
so far, i have compared affluent children to all lower income children. turing to the lower panel of table 3, i examine the achievement of verylow income children, comparing children in thebottom income quintile to those in the top 80 percent of the income distribution. model 1 indicates that poor children s test scores do not differ from the achievement of all higher income students . in models 2 and 3, the interaction term is negative, as expected income segregation is hypothesizedto be detrimental for low income children but nonsignificant. marginal effects plots confirm that the effect of fam ily poverty is not significantly associated with achievement at any level of income segregation.table 3. multilevel regression models predicting t est scores from family affluence or poverty, income segregation between school districts, and their interaction.
variablemodel 1  mathmodel 2  mathmodel 3  mathmodel 1  readingmodel 2  readingmodel 3  reading family affluence t op income quintile 2.581 20.599 6.537 2.264y1.119 217.642   income segregation between school districts1.309 15.069 217.164 231.026   t op quintile 3income segregation37.194y116.117 23.960 94.474    msa controls y y constant 57.477 57.512 65.799 43.533 56.181 50.430 family poverty bottom income quintile 0.126 2.485 211.674 20.531 0.118 211.824   income segregation between school districts15.533y46.051 22.285 0.700   bottom quintile 3income segregation235.698 252.490 29.670 237.806   msa controls y y constant 55.615 55.014 59.864 42.403 42.413 42.103 note all models include individual controls . model 3 controls for msa income inequality, racial composition and segregation, median income,and private school enrollment. n 1,202 children in 170 msas. msa metropolitan statistical area y yes .
yp c20.10. p c20.05. p c20.01.12 sociology of education xxtherefore, i find little evidence that income segregation is detrimental for students in the lowestincome quintile. future research, however, should investigate other cut points in the incomedistribution, as figure 3 provides some evidence that reading scores of children in the lower 80 per cent of the income distribution decline as income segregation increases.
figure 4. predicted math scores for students with top quintile income compared to all others by income segregation between school districts.
note estimates from t able 3, model 3. all covariates held at their mean value.
figure 5. predicted reading scores for students with top quintile income compared to all others by income segregation between school districts.
note estimated from table 3, model 3. all covariates held at their mean value.owens 13these results prompted investigation into how income segregation shapes affluent and poor children s school districts. using 2000 sdds data, i estimated the median household incomein school districts of high and low income fami lies with children in more or less segregated metropolitan areas. median income in a school district serves as a rough proxy for the district s financialand social resources. i calculated counts of high est and lowest income quintile families in each district. then i divided msas into quartiles based on the distribution of segregation in my sampleand used weighted means to estimate medianhousehold income in the school district of the average high or low income family with children in each income segregation quartile.
figure 6 plots school district median income on they axis. the four sets of bars across the x axis represent high income and low income families in msas by income segrega tion quartile. the gap between high and lowincome families median district income is larger in metropolitan areas with higher income segrega tion between school districts. this is due to high income families living in increasingly affluent school districts as income segregation rises. the median income in low income families districtsvaries little between the most and least segregated msas ,whereas the median income in high income fami lies districts is nearly 40 percent higher in themost compared to least segregated msas. this is consistent with past research showing that segregation of the affluent is higher than segregation of thepoor between school districts .therefore, it is not surprising that results thus farindicate that the achievement gap is higher inmore segregated places largely due to affluent stu dents performing better income segregation provides benefits for the advantaged yet does little to change the context for poor students. of course,median district income hides diversity within dis tricts, and low income students likely live in morehomogenously low income districts in the mostsegregated msas.
income segregation and black and white children s achievement next, i examine how the racial, rather than income, achievement gap varies by income segre gation between districts. all models in table 4control for student traits, including family income.
figure 6. median income in the school district of the average high or low income family, by metropolitan area income segregation.
note high and low income defined as the top and bottom national income quintiles in 2002. income segregation quartiles defined by analysis sample.14 sociology of education xxi limit the sample to white and black students. as model 1 indicates, white students math and reading achievement is substantially higher than black students  achievement, net of earlier test scores. model 2adds income segregation and its interaction with income. the interaction between income segregation and child race is positive and significant forboth reading and math scores. the gap between white and black students achievement is larger in more economically segregated metropolitanareas.
model 3 adds msa controls. marginal effects plots demonstrate that in integrated msas, white students do no better than black students . as segregation rises, white students score increasingly and significantly higher on math and reading tests comparedto black students. predicted values from model 3  indicate a parallel pattern to the income results for math, whitestudents perform better in more segregated metropolitan areas for reading, income segregation isassociated with higher scores among white students and lower scores among black students.
the black white achievement gap in math andreading grows from less than 5 points in integrated msas to 15 points, nearly a full standard deviation, in the most segregated msas in the sample.
what advantages or disadvantages does income segregation provide to white and black families similar to figure 6, i estimated how median household income in the school districtsof black and white families with children variedby family income and income segregation in their msa using 2000 sdds data. i identified highand low income black and white families basedon thresholds for the highest and lowest national income quintiles, divided msas into quartiles of income segregation, and estimated the medianhousehold income in the school districts of highand low income black and white families by income segregation quartile.
7figure 9 showstable 4. multilevel regression models predicting t est scores from child race, income segregation between school districts, and their interaction.
variable model 1 model 2 model 3 math scores white child 8.309 5.707 16.767   income segregation between school districts 29.656 9.627   white3income segregation 39.729 62.093y   msa controls y constant 50.031 51.478 57.278 reading scores model 1 model 2 model 3 white child 5.230 2.003 20.608   income segregation between school districts 228.574y248.400   white3income segregation 49.268 73.071y   msa controls y constant 33.924 35.997 51.455 note all models include individual controls . model 3 controls for msa income inequality, racial composition and segregation, median income, and private school enrollment share. sample includes only white and black children. n 1,064 children in 163 msas. msa metropolitan statistical area y yes .
yp c20.10. p c20.05. p c20.001.owens 15how income segregation provides advantages and disadvantages by race and income .the left set of bars in figure 9 shows that, in msas with the lowest levels of income segregation , black and white families live in fairly similar school districts. high income figure 7. predicted math scores for white and black students by income segregation between school districts.
note estimates from t able 4, model 3. all covariates held at their mean value.
figure 8. predicted reading scores for white and black students by income segregation between school districts.
note estimates from t able 4, model 3. all covariates held at their mean value.16 sociology of education xxblack families live in slightly higher income districts than do low income black families, witha similar income gap among white families. theright set of bars, however, shows that income seg regation provides large advantages for high income white families but not for high incomeblack families. in fact, in highly segregated metro politan areas, the average high income black fam ily lived in a school district with nearly identical median income as the average low income white family . the racialachievement gap may be larger in highly econom ically segregated metropolitan areas because whitestudents, particularly high income ones, haveaccess to more affluent districts than do nearlyall black students, even high income black stu dents. this portrait of high and low income blackand white families school districts suggests thathigh family income translates to affluent school districts for white children but not for black children. this is consistent with research on differen ces in neighborhood attainment for black andwhite households with similar incomes . future research shouldinvestigate whether contextual effects on theincome achievement gap operate differentlyamong black and white individuals .
discussion since the mid twentieth century, economic inequality has increased across several indicators, including income inequality income segregation between neighborhoods, schools, and school dis tricts and income gaps in educational achievement. economic stratification has serious consequences for intergenerational mobility and futuredisparities between the rich and the poor. i argue that income segregation creates inequalities in the economic and social resources of school dis tricts serving advantaged and disadvantaged chil dren, and my results indicate that income segregation between school districts contributes to the income achievement gap. while economic stratifi cation has increased, racial inequality persists, and i find that income segregation between districts also contributes to the black white test scoregap. considering students race and income jointly, i find that high income white families live in the affluent districts that income figure 9. median income in the school district of the average high or low income black or white family, by metropolitan area income segregation.
note high and low income defined as the top and bottom national income quintiles in 2002. income segregation quartiles defined by analysis sample.owens 17segregation creates, whereas high income black families do not access these advantageous con texts. this article contributes to the large body of research demonstrating that where children grow up and how much money their parentshave do contribute to their future outcomes, in complex and interacting ways, despite the promise of the american dream .
studies of inequality often focus on the disadvantaged group s outcomes, but my resultsemphasize that inequality also arises due to gains made by advantaged groups. the income achievement gap grows as income segregation increasesmainly because high income students benefit from high levels of income segregation. similarly, income segregation contributes to the racial achievement gap largely by boosting white students scores. children from advantaged familiesaccumulate additional resources in segregated places because their families can access the most advantaged contexts. results for reading providesome evidence that income segregation is also detrimental for lower income and black students  reading achievement, requiring further investiga tion. broadly, these findings emphasize that segregation has trade offs it may benefit advantaged families and harm disadvantaged families. achievement gaps emerge not only because disadvantaged students fall behind butalso because advantaged students pull away. my results are consistent with reeves s argument that families with incomes in the top quintileare hoarding opportunities for their children. this has troubling implications for future economic, political, and social polarization.
my results differ somewhat from past research showing that racial and economic segregation between schools and neighborhoods has detrimental effects for disadvantaged low income and black students and minimal effects on advan taged students . this is in part due to design differences  research on economic segregation often distin guishes only between the poor and nonpoor and thus does not examine outcomes at the top of the income distribution. one substantive hypothesis is that segregation at different geographic or administrative levels contributes to inequality dif ferently. mayer also finds that income segregation between school districts is advantageous for high income children s educationalattainment but does not significantly predict outcomes for low income children. identifying howsegregation at various geographic and administrative levels creates advantages and disadvantagesfor different groups is critical for understanding the mechanisms and policy approaches that could reduce inequality. this is an urgent task for futureresearch. perhaps in highly segregated metropolitan areas, high income students benefit from high quality teachers, better facilities, financial contributions and involvement from parents, or advanced curriculum in their very high incomedistricts. lack of these extra resources may not affect minimum levels of achievement, so low income students scores may not suffer asincome segregation rises. segregation within districts may also drive results for low income students if low income students attend the most disadvantaged schools in mixed income districts in integrated metropolitan areas, their economic andsocial contextual resources may not look much different from schools in low income districts in segregated areas. future research should investi gate the mechanisms of school districts as sources of inequality, as well as segregation within and between multiple contexts.
to reduce the income achievement gap, policy makers and researchers must understand what characteristics of affluent contexts are beneficial for children and how those benefits can be reproduced. if instructional resources, high quality cur riculum, higher teacher salaries, or state of the art facilities produce high math scores, school finance policies providing compensatory funding to low income districts could help equalize outcomes. evaluations of title i funding indicate limited effects on low income children s test scores . other studies, however, find that additional targeted resour ces may mitigate the effects of school segregation . alternatively, social resources ina district, like parents social networks, information, or a culture organized around achievement, may be critically important elements of high income students districts, which suggests that promoting socioeconomic integration across district boundaries may be necessary. income segregation between school districts creates spatial inequalities that contribute to the achievementgap. policy makers must continue to work toward solutions that benefit all students. whether integration is necessary or compensatory resourcescan overcome segregation remains an open and controversial question, but many policy makers,18 sociology of education xxactivists, researchers, and parents cannot abide a return to separate but equal.  test score gaps between high and low income children have grown over the past few decades,but new evidence suggests the school readiness gap closed modestly between high and lowincome preschoolers during the 2000s . whether this progress bearsout in later achievement and educational attain ment remains to be seen, but this finding indicatesthere are lessons to be learned on closing theincome achievement gap in an era of risingincome inequality and income segregation.
income segregation is one avenue through which income differences play out, but family processesare also important. research indicates that low income parents invested more in their childrenvia books, educational games and computers, and parental engagement during the 2000s, narrowing the income gap in childhood parentalinvestment . if low income parents cannot buy their way into advantaged contexts, perhaps the income achievement gap can benarrowed by family expenditures on other experi ences and resources that benefit children and raise their achievement level to that of affluent children.
other supports, like the expansion of welfare andhealth care policies for low income children, also contribute to child well being. families, schools, school districts, and neighborhoods, alongwith state policy, are all important for children swell being, and each area has potential policy levers that can be pushed to close achievement gaps.owens 19table a1. full models predicting math and reading scores.
variabletable 2, model 1  matht able 2, model 1  readingtable 2, model 4  mathtable 2, model 4  reading family income 0.235 0.221y21.853 0.528   income segregation between districts 25.293 254.974y   family income 3income segregation 7.347 6.707    prior test score 0.369 0.464 0.366 0.464    black 27.970 25.366 27.966 25.032    hispanic 26.213 26.739 25.104 25.452    asian 7.702 24.437 8.573 23.497   other race 0.688 20.825 0.753 20.581   male 2.495 20.482 2.342 20.462   t wo parent family 20.034 0.964 0.040 0.492   siblings 20.187 20.313 20.276 20.329   parent years of education 0.338y0.674 0.244 0.590    parent expectations 5.870 5.662 5.828 5.550    msa income inequality 257.880 216.068   msa percentage black 16.155 2.002   msa percentage hispanic 3.289 2.316   msa racial segregation 22.068 18.461y   msa median income 0.658 1.164y   msa private enrollment share 218.591 214.401   msa income inequality 3family income 6.490 1.463   msa percentage black 3family income 21.962y0.191   msa percentage hispanic 3family income 21.476 22.115    msa racial segregation 3family income 21.926 23.127    msa median income 3family income 20.046 20.078   msa private enrollment 3family income 20.576 0.103   constant 56.974 43.210 79.419 45.369 yp c20.10. p c20.05. p c20.01. p c20.001.appendix20 sociology of education xxtable a2. replication of table 2 using ordinary least squares regressions with probability weights and clustered standard errors.
variable table 2, model 3 table 2, model 4 math scores family income 20.163 21.649   income segregation between districts 23.024 211.253   family income 3income segregation 2.985 7.590    msa controls y constant 53.756 79.750 reading scores family income 20.214 1.058   income segregation between districts 215.322 234.747   family income 3income segregation 2.400 5.902   msa controls y constant 45.049 37.511 note models include control variables as in t able 2, models 3 and 4. i weight analyses with the panel study on income dynamics child weight and cluster standard errors by msa. as is typical, standard errors are larger than innonweighted models. msa metropolitan statistical area y yes .
yp c20.10. p c20.05. p c20.01. p c20.001.
figure a1. marginal effects of family affluence on math scores by income segregation between school districts.
note black line estimates marginal effects from t able 3, model 2 gray dashed lines represent 95 percent confidence interval.owens 21figure a2. marginal effects of child poverty on math scores by income segregation between districts.
note black line estimates marginal effects from t able 3, model 3 gray dashed lines represent 95 percent confidence interval.
figure a3. marginal effects of child poverty on reading scores by income segregation between districts.
note black line estimates marginal effects from t able 3, model 3 gray dashed lines represent 95 percent confidence interval.22 sociology of education xxfigure a4. marginal effects of child race on math scores by income segregation between districts.
note black line estimates marginal effects from table 4, model 4 gray dashed lines represent 95 percent confidence interval.
figure a5. marginal effects of child race on reading scores by income segregation between districts.
note black line estimates marginal effects from table 4, model 4 gray dashed lines represent 95 percent confidence interval.owens 23acknowledgments this research was supported by the spencer foundation  and the russell sage foundation. the author was also supported bya national academy of education spencer foundationpostdoctoral fellowship. the author appreciates feedbackfrom peter rich, dick murnane, daniel schrage, andaudiences at the appam and paa conferences and thecolumbia university center on wealth and inequality.
some of the data used in this analysis are derived from restricted data files of the panel study of incomedynamics , obtained under special contractualarrangements designed to protect the anonymity ofrespondents. these data are not available from theauthor. persons interested in obtaining psid restricteddata files should contact psidhelp isr.umich.edu.
notes 1. gaps between white and hispanic students are also large and troubling i focus on black white gapsdue to data availability in the panel study of incomedynamics .
2. other research notes that integration may bring the risk of relative deprivation or frog pond effects that is, advantaged peers are disadvantageous forlow income children because low income childrenmay compare themselves unfavorably to higher income peers, or low income children may not suc cessfully access resources in advantaged contexts. crosnoe finds thatlow income students have lower self image and feelmore isolated in high income schools but finds noeffects on grades. my analyses allow for the possibil ity of frog pond effects.
3. family income is the sum of the taxable and transfer income of the household head and spouse, if present,as well as the taxable and transfer income of otherfamily members and the supplemental securityincome , if any, of all family members.
4. i do not weight analyses because the psid does not provide multilevel weights accounting for metropoli tan statistical area residence. i replicate table 2 in theappendix using weighted ordinary least squaresregressions with standard errors clustered at the met ropolitan area level.
5. the achievement tests are standardized by child s age, so i do not control for age. two parent familiesinclude married or cohabiting household heads. par ent education is the higher education level of house hold head or partner, if present.
6. past research also often focuses only on very lowincome families and often does not control for priorachievement.
7. i replicated the analysis with race specific income distributions, and results are substantively identical.references