applied geography 116 102167 available online 14 february 2020 0143 6228 2020 elsevier ltd. all rights reserved.technology, talent and economic segregation in cities  richard floridaa, charlotta mellanderb,  arotman school of management and school of cities, university of toronto, canada  bj onk oping international business school, j onk oping university, sweden  1.introduction  the sharp increases in economic and spatial inequality have become  of increasing interest to researchers and public policymakers. a large  body of research has documented the growth of both economic  inequality and spatial inequality across metropolitan  areas . other research has also documented an increase in economic segregation within urban areas . more  recent studies have examined the connection between innovation and  economic inequality across states and between innovation and economic segregation  between and within metropolitan areas .  our research furthers this work by examining the connection between technology, talent and economic segregation. in doing this, we  draw on established urban and economic theory, identifying a basic  mechanism that connects human capital, economic segregation and  innovation. on the one hand, innovative high tech industries require  dense spatial clusters of highly skilled, highly paid workers . these affluent groups are able to buy housing in better neighborhoods with easy access to employment and transportation, and  which offer better schools, better amenities and better services . the demand for housing by these more advantaged workers  in turn increases its cost, causing less skilled, lower paid service and  blue collar workers to be pushed further away from these neighborhoods. this, in turn, leads to increased economic segregation.  on the other hand, such higher levels of economic segregation are  likely to hinder the innovative capacity of places. a broad body of urban  economic theory identifies the connection between diversity and innovation . denser, more  diverse places attract a wider range of talent or skill and human capital.  but economic segregation, by definition, separates groups into different  parts of the city, thereby reducing their ability to interact to generate  innovative ideas and innovative companies. our research explicitly examines the connection between innovation  and residential segregation, specifically the segregation of different  socio economic classes within metropolitan areas. we theorize that  residential segregation acts to impede the human capital externalities  identified by lucas and jacobs that are the product of  dense residential clustering of people in cities, and which act as key  drivers of innovation and economic development. we focus explicitly on  the effects of place of residence as opposed to place of work. it is true  that the clustering of industry and employment might compensate for  the effects of residential segregation, by creating clusters of high tech  workers which can spur innovation. our argument is that this is a  necessary but insufficient condition for optimal innovation. even if industry and work are clustered, we theorize that the segregation of  groups of people by residence will hinder and impede the innovativeness  of places. our models test these propositions empirically.  our research probes three key questions. first, are metropolitan  areas with higher levels of technology and talent also more economically  segregated second, do these areas become more segregated over time  and, third, do higher levels of economic segregation lead to lower levels  of innovation and regional economic performance.  to explore these questions, we use structural equation models to  examine the relationships between technology, talent and economic  segregation, while controlling for other economic and demographic  factors as well as changes in segregation over the last decade. we use a  dissimilarity index of economic segregation based on income, education  and occupation, and we test for determinants as well as segregation  effects on regional innovative capacity and income per capita.  our findings suggest that technology and talent are associated with  higher levels of economic segregation, but not with the increases in  economic segregation we have seen over time. however, we find that  greater levels of economic segregation work to hinder both innovative  and economic performance.  the remainder of this paper proceeds as follows. the next section  outlines the key theories which inform our theory and analysis.  following that, we discuss the variables and data and structural equation modelling used in our analysis. next, we present the results from   corresponding author.  e mail addresses richard.florida rotman.utoronto.ca , charlotta.mellander ju.se .  contents lists available at sciencedirect  applied geography  u zkw s yo kro s 22 1 ow o to 1m y2w mk o2k r o r  https doi.org 10.1016 j.apgeog.2020.102167  received 8 march 2019 received in revised form 15 january 2020 accepted 3 february 2020 applied geography 116 102167 2our structural equation models. we then summarize our key findings  about the connections between innovation, talent and economic segregation and discuss the major takeaways and implications of our research  in the concluding section.  2.concepts and theory  a wide body of research in economics, sociology, geography and  regional science has documented growing economic divides between  socio economic classes across and within places. one stream of research  has focused on the rise in inequality within and across nations . piketty documents a significant rise in economic  inequality across nations and argues that it is a function of a basic law of  capitalism. a large body of studies suggests that inequality is a function  of skill biased technical change , brought on by globalization, the deindustrialization of once high paying manufacturing jobs and the splitting of the  labor market it into a smaller cluster of high paying, high skill knowledge jobs and a much larger share of low paying, low skill routine service jobs.  divides are not only growing between the rich and the poor, but  across places. several studies document growing spatial inequality  across cities and metropolitan areas . this is largely a result of the geographic clustering of high skill,  high wage industries and jobs. other research has noted the clustering of  more educated and skilled people in locations that are both more productive and have access to better jobs and career networks and which  offer higher levels of amenities .  economic inequality across metropolitan areas has also been found  to be closely linked to population size . wage inequality has been found to  be closely associated with both population size and technology across  canadian metropolitan areas and with  levels of skill and affluence across urban areas in the u.k. .  other research has also found that the higher levels of urban  inequality are associated with lower rates of economic growth, after  controlling for factors like education and skill levels and that more economically unequal metropolitan areas also  experienced significantly shorter spells of growth .  spatial inequality not only exists across cities and metropolitan areas  but within them. as cities and metropolitan areas attract knowledge  based industries and more highly skilled talent, more advantaged  groups colonize the most economically advantageous and highest  amenity locations, pushing the less skilled and less affluent into less  well connected and less well served areas .  research has identified that economic inequality and spatial segregation within cities and metropolitan areas has been growing for decades. income segregation has increased in all but three of the usa s 30  largest metropolitan areas between 1980 and 2010 . roughly 85 percent of the residents of u.s metropolitan areas  lived in neighborhoods that were more economically segregated in year  2000 than they were in 1970 .  economic segregation also has been found to have a negative effect  on upward socio economic mobility . bischoff and reardon find that economic segregation has increased the most in more skilled, more knowledge based and  more affluent metropolitan areas, and that they have less unemployment  and lower share of manufacturing industry jobs. their research also  finds economic segregation to be higher in metropolitan areas with  greater levels of families with children.  economic segregation creates significant economic penalties for  disadvantaged groups . rothwell and massey  find that the difference in lifetime earnings between those raised in the richest 20 percent of neighborhoods versus those who grow up in the  bottom 20 percent is about the same as the difference between just  completing high school and having a college degree, adding up to nearly  a million dollars in lifetime earnings. mellander, stolarick, and lobo   find that residential location has a bigger effect on the income of  low skilled groups than higher skilled groups, who by definition have  more locational choices.  there has long been a connection between race and economic  segregation. wilson long ago identified the concentration of racial  disadvantage in cities and its effects on income and economic mobility  . glaeser and vigdor found  racial segregation to have declined over time, but economic segregation  remains closely connected to race .  indeed, metropolitan areas have been found to be splitting into areas of  racially concentrated poverty and racially concentrated affluence  . the economic penalty for growing up  in conditions of racially concentrated poverty is considerable. chetty  et al. find race and racial segregation to be connected to lower  rates of economic mobility. rothwell and massey find that lower  rates of economic mobility among african americans is connected to  their disproportionate segregation in disadvantaged neighborhoods.  other research identifies a connection between residential segregation  and employment .  recent studies suggest that economic inequality has worsened due to  the relatively recent back to the city movement among affluent and  educated households . several factors  seem to be motivating this greater access to high paying knowledge and  professional jobs, avoidance of long commutes by car, , and easier access to superior services and amenities. as the more  highly educated and affluent groups have come back to the urban center, lower income, less educated groups, particularly members of racial  minorities, have either moved or been pushed out, exacerbating economic segregation .  economic segregation also appears to be associated with other factors, including the size of metros. larger metros tend to have more  segregated geographic patterns simply as a result of their size, greater  number of neighborhood options, multiple commercial districts, and  commuting distances. there is evidence that greater commuting distances and sprawl affects economic segregation .  other research suggests that the clustering of high tech and talent  are connected to the growth in spatial inequality and economic segregation. for one, cities and urban areas have become increasingly  preferred locations for high tech company startups precisely because of  the increased locational preference of highly skilled technology workers  . a study of innovation and inequality  across states found a reasonably strong connection between innovation  and the increase in the share of income going to the top one percent, but  little evidence of a connection between innovation and broader income  inequality as measured by the gini coefficient .  indeed, this study found that states with higher levels of innovation had  higher rates of economic mobility. in addition, berkes and gaetani   found a negative relationship between economic segregation and  innovation across metropolitan areas.  overall, there are good reasons drawn from urban theory to expect  that economic segregation may act to hinder innovation. a broad body  of research shows that innovation is the product of the clustering of  diverse groups of skilled people, related economic assets and ideas  . lucas refers to this dense and diverse  clustering of talent in urban centers as broadly providing the basic  mechanism of innovation and economic development. a large body of  empirical studies has found close connections between dense, diverse  urban places and higher levels of innovation and income 102167 32007 florida, 2002 glaeser, 2011 . while there is still some debate on  which exact measures best reflect the association between diversity and  innovation for example, levels of immigration versus measures of  openness to the gay population there is general consensus that innovation is associated with higher levels of demographic and economic  diversity across places. recent research suggests that diversity is positively associated with segregation that is, places that are more diverse  across racial, ethnic, or sexual orientation tend to have higher levels of  socio economic segregation . diversity of course refers to the mix of people in general, while segregation  refers to the separation of groups of people by income, race or other  factors.  for these reasons, we focus on residential segregation in terms of the  separation of different socio economic groups or classes of people within  metropolitan areas. as noted above, jacobs and lucas  identify the clustering and concentration of dense and diverse human  capital in cities, which lucas dubbed human capital externalities, as the  primary mechanism for innovation and economic development. higher  levels of economic segregation may impinge innovation by separating  groups according to income, education, and other factors, limiting their  members ability to interact in ways that generated new ideas, technologies or enterprises. this suggests that places that are more  economically segregated may grow less innovative over time.  other research shows that economic segregation takes on different  shapes and is expressed differently in different kinds of cities and metros  . traditionally, metropolitan  areas have been segregated with more affluent classes in the suburbs and  less advantaged groups concentrated in the urban center. but that  pattern has changed and even been inverted in some metro areas that  have seen a recent back to the city movement among the affluent and  educated, leading to an attendant gentrification. florida and adler   suggest that segregation now takes on a more variegated or  patchwork pattern across metro areas. the focus of our research is less  on the particular expression of segregation in different kinds of cities and  metros and more on the underlying factors that shape segregation across  all metro areas.  in light of these broad concepts and theory, our research examines  the connection between technology, talent and economic segregation  across metropolitan areas. our basic theory is that economic segregation  will be greater in more technology intensive metros with higher levels of  talent. these two factors work together and independently to raise the  economic performance of metros as a whole and the incomes of higher  skilled households in particular. but this leads to higher levels of  inequality, thereby increasing segregation. these factors will overwhelm the increase demographic diversity of such metros, leading to  higher levels of economic segregation. thus, we also expect to find that  more diverse metros to also be more economically segregated. the  complicating factor of course is race. because of the long legacy of  concentrated black poverty , we expect to find metros with higher concentrations of african  americans to be more economically segregated.  in light of this broad framing, our research is structured around three  basic questions or hypotheses that metropolitan areas with higher  levels of technology and talent will also have higher levels of economic  segregation, that these metropolitan areas are likely to become more  segregated over time, and that higher levels of economic segregation  will also lead to lower levels of innovation and of regional income over  time.  3.model, variables and data  we use structural equation modelling to examine the connections  between technology, talent and economic segregation across metropolitan areas. we build on the structure generated by florida, mellander, and stolarick, which examined the connection between  technology, talent and regional economic performance. the use of structural equation modelling enables us to look at the effect of technology and talent on the level and change in economic segregation on  the one hand, and at the effect of economic segregation on the level of  technology and talent on the other, while controlling for a range of other  economic and demographic factors. we include variables for openness  to diversity to take into account the effects of diversity of universities to  control for the effects of a metro s research and knowledge base as well  as variables for income, unemployment, manufacturing industry and  income inequality.  table 1 summarizes the descriptive statistics for these variables. we  log these variables in our models and empirical analysis. the appendix  provides fuller data on these variables for all metros with more than one  million people, listing their levels of economic segregation, changes in  segregation, and their level of innovation.  3.1. key variables  economic segregation this is measured as the average of three types  of segregation income segregation, educational segregation and occupational segregation. these are also three core dimensions of socioeconomic class. they are based on an index of dissimilarity based on census tract level data across metropolitan  areas for the years 2000 and 2010, and cover close to 60,000 tracts in  350 plus metropolitan regions. income segregation is based on poor  households, defined as those below the poverty level, compared to  wealthy households, defined as those with incomes of 200,000 and  above. educational segregation compares adults with less than a high  school degree to those with a bachelor s degree and above. occupational  segregation compares knowledge workers, professional and creative  occupations to blue collar manufacturing and service occupations. our  overall measure of economic segregation is based on an average of these  indexes. the data for year 2000 is from the ipums national historical  gis for  census tracts. we have employed the nhgis crosswalk for 2000 and  2010 to match the metropolitan area boundaries. the 2010 data comes  from the american community survey , 5 year estimate for table 1  descriptive statistics for variables.  mean minimum maximum standard  deviation  year 2000  change in economic  segregationa .074 .086 .296 .065  talent .234 .110 .524 .075  technology .559 .000 29.956 2.179  income inequality .442 .355 .542 .027  unemployment .037 .015 .078 .010  black share .105 .002 .487 .109  foreign born share .006 .008 .509 .068  share under 15 .212 .128 .307 .025  share above 65 .126 .042 .347 .032  year 2010  talent .252 .113 .569 .077  technology .349 .001 11.174 1.171  economic segregation .267 .161 .365 .042  innovation 7.501 .129 106.198 9.482  income per capita 24,058 13,450 44,024 4084  openness .659 .259 2.140 .265  university .006 .000 .033 .005  manufacturing. .114 .022 .366 .054  income inequality .448 .385 .539 .026  unemployment .089 .031 .180 .002  african american .108 .002 .519 .109  foreign born .075 .009 .365 .067  d15 years .198 .116 .301 .026  f65 years .132 .062 .335 .032  a2000 2010. r. florida and c. mellander applied geography 116 102167 42005 2010. for our purposes, this tract level data is based on place of  residence, not place of work.  talent we employ the standard measure for educational attainment  or human capital based on the share of adults with a bachelor s degree or  more. these data sources are from the same acs, ipums, and nhgis  sources as above.  technology this variable measures high tech industry concentration  in terms of high technology industrial output as a percentage of total us  high tech industrial output and the percentage of metro s total economic  output from high tech industries compared to the national share . this variable is for the year  2000 and 2010.  innovation this variable is based on patents per 100,000 people and  is from the us patent and trademark office .1  average income this is measured as income per capita 2010 from the  acs.  3.2. control variables  income inequality this is measured by the conventional measure of  the gini coefficient. this variable captures the distribution of incomes  from the bottom to the top. since the census does not publish figures for  income levels above 100,000 for metropolitan areas, we are unable to  calculate the gini coefficient, so we have to rely on the gini coefficients  provided by the census for the years 2006 and 2010 as gini coefficients  for metropolitan areas are not available for prior years. however, these  gini coefficients appear to be somewhat consistent over time, with a  correlation coefficient 0.730 for 2006 and 2012.  unemployment this is the share of the labor force that is registered as  unemployed based on the same acs, ipums, and nhgis sources as  above.  race we use a variable based on acs 2010.for the share of african  americans to control for race.  foreign born . we include a variable representing the share of adults  who are foreign born. this is from acs 2010. age we include two measures for age share of the population under  age 15 and over 65. these are again from the same acs, ipums and  nhgis sources as above.  university this is faculty per capita 2010, based on data from national science foundation.  manufacturing this is the share of employees working in the  manufacturing industry. the data is for year 2010 and comes from the  census county business patterns.  openness this is a combination of the concentration of gay and  lesbian households and the concentration of individuals employed in  cultural occupations. the data are from the 2005 2009 census.  3.3. structural equation modelling  we use structural equation models to examine the relationships  among these variables according to our research questions and hypotheses. fig. 1 illustrates the hypothesized relationships we examine in  our empirical models.  the regression system can be translated into six integrated equations  which are as follows  change ineconomic segregation 2000 2010 11talent 2000   12technology 2000 13income inequalit y2000 14unemployment 2000  d  15control variables 2000   talent 2010 21openness 2010 22university 2010 22manufacturing 2010   technology 2010 31openness 2010 32universit y2010   33talent 2010 34change ineconomic segregation 2000 2010  economic segregation 2010 41talent 2010 42technology 2010  43change ineconomic segregation 2000 2010 44unemployment 2010  45manufacturing 2010 46inequality 2010 d  47control variables 2010   innovation 2010 51talent 2010 52technology 2010  53economic segregation 2010  fig. 1.system of equations.  1 we thank dr. deborah strumsky for sharing data on inventors and patents.  a more detailed description of the patent and inventor variables is available  upon request. r. florida and c. mellander applied geography 116 102167 5income 2010 61skill 2010 62technology 2010 63economic segregation 2010  64change ineconomic segregation 2000 2010 65innovation 2010   equations and examine how technology and talent relate to  the level and change in economic segregation while controlling for other  factors such as inequality, unemployment, and demography. equations   and examine the factors that bear on talent and technology. these  regressions also capture factors such as openness and access to universities which we assume to be directly related to talent and technology,  and may be indirectly linked to segregation. equations and  examine the role of skill and technology on the level and change in  economic segregation, and also the effect of the change in economic  segregation on innovation and regional economic performance  . technically, we allow all exogenous  variables in equations and to be correlated with one another.  equation is included to partly capture path dependency and deal  with endogeneity, since metropolitan areas with higher levels of economic segregation may be experiencing this due to structures that were  in place already a decade earlier and therefore also had a negative  impact on the change in economic segregation over time.  it is important to note that the causal relations in the model are based  on theory, and what is tested is an expression of direct and indirect  correlations. the estimated parameters thus capture the indirect and  direct relations between a set of variables. these parameters can be  expressed as standardized beta values, which will capture the variables  relative importance within that equation, while taking the indirect effects from the other regression equations into account. they can also be  expressed as unstandardized beta values that capture the actual direct  and indirect relation between each variable and the dependent variable.  the structural equation models are estimated by a maximum likelihood method. we are aware of possible feedback loops in this system of  equations, but the modelling technique does not allow us to take them  into account. the aim is to test these relations in sequences, where also  indirect relations are taken into account. in summarizing the results, we  report both unstandardized and standardized coefficients. 4.findings  we now turn to the key findings of the analysis. we begin with the  findings for a basic correlation analysis, and then turn to the findings of  our structural equation models.  4.1. correlation findings  table 2 summarizes the key findings for the correlation analysis.2 we  organize and focus on the correlations for the dependent variables in our  models.  for equation , the change in economic segregation is negatively  related to the variables for technology and talent as well as income  inequality and race, though the correlations are rather small. for  equation , talent is positively related to universities, and also with  higher levels of openness, and negatively related to manufacturing. in  equation , technology is highly related to talent and openness, more  modestly associated with universities and negatively related to the  change in segregation. for equation , the level of economic segregation is positively related to technology and talent as well as income  inequality, race and foreign born, while being negatively associated  with an older population and with higher levels of manufacturing. in  equation , we find innovation is positively associated with economic  segregation as well as with technology and talent. turning to equation  , we find that regional income is negatively associated with higher  levels of economic segregation and negatively associated with the  change in economic segregation. as expected, regional income is also  positively associated with technology, talent and innovation. in sum, we  find higher levels of technology and talent to be associated with higher  levels of economic segregation, but not with a greater increase in economic segregation. fig. 2 plots the connection between technology and table 2  correlation analysis findings.  eq. 1  change in economic segregation eq. 2  talent eq. 3  technology eq. 4  economic segregation eq. 5  innovation eq. 6  income  year 2000  talent .219a  technology .306a  income inequality .217a  unemployment .073  african american .220a  foreign born .106b  d15 years of age .105b  f65 years of age .092  year 2010  talent .663a .450a .631a .740a  technology .608a .552a .602a  economic segregation 2010 .259a .254a  change in economic segregation .336a .227a .158a  innovation .554a  income  openness .663a .742a  university .498a .163a  manufacturing .255a .170a  income inequality .489a  unemployment .020  african american .391a  foreign born .426a  d15 years .123b  f65 years .371a  aindicate significance at the 1 percent level.  bat the 5 percent level.  2 we report the correlations related to each of the dependent variables in our  system of equations. a full correlation table for all included variables is available from the authors upon request. r. florida and c. mellander applied geography 116 102167 6economic segregation, while fig. 3 does so for talent and economic  segregation  4.2. findings of the structural equation models  we now turn to the findings of our structural equation models, which  provide a more refined test of our hypotheses regarding the relationships  between technology, talent and economic segregation. table 3 summarizes the key findings from these models. we report the squared  multiple correlations which are the equivalent to r2 values from each  separate regression in the system.  starting with equation which explores the change in economic  segregation over the decade 2000 2010, the r2 is just 0.181. there is a  negative association for talent and technology, implying that places with  more skill and larger tech industries experienced a slight decline in  economic segregation between these years. the change in economic  segregation was, surprisingly, also negatively associated with a larger  share of african americans and larger shares of younger and older  people. that said, indirect associations between current economic  segregation and technology and talent ten years earlier are captured in  equation where the change in economic segregation is included as an explanatory variable.  equation looks at the determinants of talent here the r2 is 0.624.  talent is positively associated with universities and negatively associated with manufacturing. given the strong relationships, we could also  expect more indirect relationships from universities and openness, and  the level of segregation, via talent as hypothesized in equation .  equation examines the factors associated with technology this  regression generates an r2 of 0.606. technology is positively associated  with talent and openness as expected, but surprisingly, it is negative and  weakly associated with universities, with the lowest standardized beta  value in this equation context. the result may partly be a multicollinearity effect due to the relatively strong relation with talent , but the bivariate correlation also  suggests that the university is only  weakly related to technology.  equation examines the factors associated with higher levels of  economic segregation. talent and technology are explanatory variables  alongside a number of control variables related to industry structures,  race, demography and inequality. economic segregation is still positively associated with both talent and even more so with technology. it is  also associated with a greater change in economic segregation between  fig. 2.technology and economic segregation.  fig. 3.talent and economic segregation. r. florida and c. mellander applied geography 116 102167 72000 and 2010. for the control variables, we find positive relations for  income inequality, as well as for the share of african americans.  metropolitan areas with larger shares of individuals over 65 and lower  shares of children under the age of 15 are significantly less segregated.  the r2 for this model is 0.655.  equation examines the factors that bear on innovation. innovation is positively related to talent and technology, as expected, but it is  negatively associated with economic segregation. this means that  metropolitan areas with more talent and technology are more innovative, but if they also are more economically segregated, that innovative  capacity will partly be restricted. the r2 here is 0.447.  equation looks at the factors that bear on regional economic  performance broadly measured as the average income level. the r2 for  this model is 0.598. income is positively associated with talent and  technology, which is in line with the broader literature and the findings  of previous studies. but again, it is negatively associated with economic  segregation once talent and technology are controlled for. this means  that both innovative capacity and income levels will be higher in  metropolitan areas with more talent and technology, but if that is  combined with higher levels of economic segregation, both will be  hindered to some degree.  5.discussion and conclusions  our research has examined the connections between technology,  talent and economic segregation. it was structured around three key  questions. first, do metropolitan areas with higher levels of technology and talent experience higher levels of economic segregation second, do  metropolitan areas with higher levels of technology and talent become  more economically segregated over time and third, do places with  higher levels of economic segregation negatively experience lower levels  of innovative and economic performance controlling for other factors  we examined these three questions through the use of structural equation models which allowed us to examine the direct and indirect associations between technology, talent and economic segregation, while  controlling for a wide range of other factors.  as noted at the start, urban theory provides good reasons why more  skilled, high tech metropolitan areas are likely to experience greater  levels of economic segregation. here, we find that both technology and  talent are associated with higher levels of economic segregation, but not  with increases in economic segregation over time.  our analysis was also designed to test the notion, implied by urban  economic theory, that higher levels of economic segregation may  negatively impact innovation and economic performance. there is a  long tradition of urban and economic theory that suggests that a key  contributing factor to innovation is the ability of cities to gather together  a diverse array of skilled and talented people with different backgrounds  and knowledge. thus, as cities and metropolitan areas become more  segregated by income, education and occupation, the connection between diversity and innovation will be diminished.  theory would also imply that this reduces the level of innovation  and, since innovation is an input for economic performance, that it reduces economic performance as well. our findings suggest that this is  indeed the case. the level of economic segregation is negative and table 3  sem regression results.  independent variable dependent variable unst. stand. r2  equation  talent change in economic segregation 0.058a 0.278  technology 0.005a 0.196  income inequality 0.131b 0.125  african american 0.008a 0.168  unemployment 0.020 0.079  foreign born .007 0.085  under 15 .175a 0.315  over 65 .057b 0.214 0.181  equation. 2  openness talent 0.497a 0.599  university 0.161a 0.377  manufacturing 0.047b 0.077 0.624  equation  talent technology 2.396a 0.355  openness 2.920a 0.521  university 0.311a 0.108 0.606  equation  talent level of economic segregation 0.068a 0.125  technology 0.030a 0.369  change in economic segregation 0.204a 0.082  income inequality 0.899a 0.316  african american 0.035a 0.268  unemployment 0.001 0.002  foreign born .024a 0.118  under 15 .144a 0.117  over 65 .084a 0.116  manufacturing 0.005 0.014 0.655  equation  technology innovation 0.171a 0.327  talent 1.736a 0.493  economic segregation 1.044a 0.161 0.447  equation  technology income 0.024a 0.299  talent 0.325a 0.595  economic segregation 0.219a 0.218  change in economic segregation 0.004 0.001  innovation 0.012 0.076 0.598  aindicate significance at the 1 percent level.  bat the 5 percent level. n 357 metropolitan areas. r. florida and c. mellander applied geography 116 102167 8significant in both of our models for innovation and income. this is  perhaps the novel and interesting finding of our analysis. once we  control for the effects of technology and talent which are both closely  associated with innovation and regional economic performance, we find  that metropolitan areas with higher levels of economic segregation are  associated with lower levels of innovative and economic performance.  this is in turn suggestive of a related conundrum that may be a  feature of urban economic growth. a growing body of research is noting  a connection between the innovative knowledge economy and economic  segregation as metropolitan areas become hubs for talent and technology, they become more spatially sorted and segregated . but as they become more economically segregated, this in turn  negatively affects their ability to innovate and spur economic growth. in  this sense, the increased sorting and economic segregation may form an  additional constraint that accompanies the growth of highly skilled  urban areas.  our research is only suggestive of this sort of counter productive  connection. we encourage further research over longer time scales to more fully explore it. one particularly fruitful avenue of research would  be to probe further the connection between place of residence and place  of work. our research shows that residential segregation dampens  innovation. future research could look more specifically at the role that  place of residence and place of work play on levels of regional innovation and economic development.  credit authorship contribution statement  richard florida conceptualization, methodology, writing original draft, writing review editing. charlotta mellander conceptualization, methodology, software, validation, formal analysis, data  curation, writing original draft, writing review editing.  acknowledgements  we thank deborah strumsky for providing her patent and inventor  data karen king for help with various aspects of this research and the  martin prosperity institute for research support.  appendix  most segregated in 2010 most segregated in 2000 most change in segregation 2000 2010 most innovative in 2010  los angeles long beach santa ana, ca los angeles long beach santa ana, ca nashville davidson murfreesboro  franklin, tn san jose sunnyvale santa clara, ca  austin round rock, tx houston sugar land baytown, tx seattle tacoma bellevue, wa san francisco oakland fremont, ca  houston sugar land baytown, tx dallas fort worth arlington, tx oklahoma city, ok seattle tacoma bellevue, wa  dallas fort worth arlington, tx austin round rock, tx riverside san bernardino ontario, ca san diego carlsbad san marcos, ca  san antonio, tx chicago naperville joliet, il in wi raleigh cary, nc portland vancouver beaverton, or  wa  columbus, oh new york northern new jersey long island,  ny nj pa las vegas paradise, nv minneapolis st. paul bloomington,  mn wi  new york northern new jersey long island,  ny nj pa san antonio, tx portland vancouver beaverton, or  wa boston cambridge quincy, ma nh  denver aurora, co columbus, oh salt lake city, ut austin round rock, tx  memphis, tn ms ar san francisco oakland fremont, ca charlotte gastonia concord, nc sc rochester, ny  phoenix mesa scottsdale, az san diego carlsbad san marcos, ca memphis, tn ms ar los angeles long beach santa ana, ca  least segregated in 2010 least segregated in 2000 least change in segregation  2000 2010 least innovative in 2010  orlando kissimmee, fl portland vancouver beaverton, or wa new orleans metairie kenner, la virginia beach norfolk newport news,  va nc  portland vancouver beaverton, or wa orlando kissimmee, fl los angeles long beach santa ana, ca new orleans metairie kenner, la  providence new bedford fall river, ri ma tampa st. petersburg clearwater, fl baltimore towson, md birmingham hoover, al  tampa st. petersburg clearwater, fl riverside san bernardino ontario, ca orlando kissimmee, fl jacksonville, fl  virginia beach norfolk newport news, va  nc pittsburgh, pa san diego carlsbad san marcos, ca oklahoma city, ok  minneapolis st. paul bloomington, mn wi seattle tacoma bellevue, wa hartford west hartford east hartford,  ct san antonio, tx  pittsburgh, pa las vegas paradise, nv chicago naperville joliet, il in wi louisville jefferson county, ky in  jacksonville, fl virginia beach norfolk newport news, va  nc san francisco oakland fremont, ca richmond, va  new orleans metairie kenner, la providence new bedford fall river, ri ma miami fort lauderdale pompano  beach, fl riverside san bernardino ontario, ca  buffalo niagara falls, ny minneapolis st. paul bloomington, mn wi atlanta sandy springs marietta, ga nashville davidson murfreesboro  franklin, tn  references