contents lists available at sciencedirect cities journal homepage www.elsevier.com locate cities the relevance of economic segregation. jane jacobs and the empirical and moral implications of an unequal spatial distribution of wealth edwin buitelaara, stefano cozzolinob,  autrecht university and pbl netherlands environmental assessment agency, the netherlands bils research institute for regional and urban development, aachen, germany abstract cities are economically segregated to various degrees. segregation translates into greater homogeneity of neighborhoods the rich and the poor usually occupy separate parts of the city. in response, urban renewal policies often focus on creating an economically more heterogeneous neighborhood composition by replacinglower income with middle income households. arguably with little or mixed success, as those policies seem to focus more on places than on the people who live there. in this regard, jane jacobs writings on slums and the conditions that favor unslumming processes are illuminating. although in the last decades the word slum has gotten out of fashion , her contributions remain relevant inorder to address the moral and empirical implications of an unequal spatial distribution of wealth. the paper discusses three aspects of jacobs writings and develops them further into three re ections on current ideas about segregation and policies trying to combat that. it concludes that debates and policies may bene t from 1 less focus on the economic di erences between neighborhoods 2 more attention to the neighborhood population s own regenerating and development potential rather than the negative e ects of segregation processes on neighborhood residents and 3 a dynamic rather than static view on the neighborhood.
1. introduction jane jacobs has written extensively on the issue of slums economically homogenous and poor neighborhoods in cities and the way slum neighborhoods can reinvent themselves and unslum without large scale government intervention that tries to coerce neighborhoods into economic heterogeneity . she deems the latter to be ine ective in genuinely improving the lives of people in neighborhoods planners must aim at unslumming the slums, by creating conditions aimed at persuading residents to stay by choice over time. they must regard slum dwellers as people capable of understanding and acting upon their ownself interests, which they certainly are. we need to discern, respect, and build upon the forces for regeneration that exist in slums themselves .
however, in practice we see many examples of local governmentspursuing policies aimed at social mixing, through relocation of the existing low income population in exchange for newcomers with a higher income. these interventions do not seem to bene t the remaining neighborhood population nor the people that were displaced toother neighborhoods .
jane jacobs writings on slums and unslumming , especially in the life and death of great american cities from 1961, are still relevant today. however, knowledge and experience have progressed since.many of her ideas back then do now have a stronger, theoretical, empirical and philosophical underpinning and have been developed further . embedding her pioneering and often intuitive ideas within both the moral philosophical literature on poverty  and the empirical and theoretical neighborhood literature sheds a refreshing light on many of today s urban renewal debates and practices. we discern three elements from jacobs writing on slums and will develop them further on the basis of  the body of knowledge created since.
the rst and foremost important idea is her very focus on the concept of slums . the word slum has gotten out of fashion in relation to poor neighborhoods in developed countries it has become reservedexclusively for poor neighborhoods, usually informal settlements, in https doi.org 10.1016 j.cities.2018.02.027 received 6 september 2017 received in revised form 16 february 2018 accepted 28 february 2018 corresponding author at ils research institute for regional and urban development, karmeliterstra e 6, aachen 52064, germany.
e mail addresses e.buitelaar uu.nl , stefano.cozzolino ils forschung.de .cities xxx xxx xxx 0264 2751 2018 elsevier ltd. all rights reserved.
please cite this article as buitelaar, e., cities , https doi.org 10.1016 j.cities.2018.02.027 developing countries. in developed countries, the abandonment of the word slum seems to indicate a shift in attention away from absolute neighborhood poverty to relative neighborhood poverty or segregation instead.1in other words, from a neighborhood s wealth level to wealth di erences between neighborhoods.2absolute neighborhood poverty can even be seen as the primary reason for the emergence of modern urban planning in the late nineteenth century. urban planning came about as a coordinated action to deal with the poverty, misery, poor sanitation and dreadful living conditions in most industrial cities . although poverty levels have indeed risen since the beginning of the twentieth century, it does not mean that the notion of focusing on absolute neighborhood poverty has become irrelevant. making sure that no person and no neighborhood is below a socially de ned poverty threshold even though that threshold rises with the passage of time  is a worthy moral ideal. this notion and its policy implications is de veloped further in section 3.
second, she looks at the possibilities of neighborhoods to reinvent and change themselves from inside, as the rst paragraph of this introduction shows, rather than on the negative impact of city widesegregation processes in the form of neighborhood e ects ,a subject that has received much attention in the literature in recent years. and third, her evolutionary approach makes us more aware of the dynamic nature of life and neighborhood trajectories. a staticsnapshot of wealth levels does not tell us much about the direction that both individuals living in that neighborhood as well as the neighborhood itself are heading toward . the aim of this paper is to develop those three ideas further, in order to re ect on current ideas about segregation and about neighborhood policies aimed at targeting segregation.
2. jane jacobs on slums slums can be seen as the urban manifestation and materialization of deprivation. this state is either temporary or more structural. jane jacobs looks at the city as a complex self organizing system that adjusts its internal order as new circumstances arise  clear demonstrations are the cases in which slums are step by step rehabilitated and improved without direct planning interventions. in this regard, the author invites the readers of the death and life of great american cities to re ect on unslumming processes in cities that is, the way through which run down and poor city districts change unexpectedly, improve and become more attractive and richer as time passes. she does so by confuting the main orthodox ideas of her time about slums, segregation and urban renewal .
she uses the example of the north end in boston, a place that was  o cially considered boston s worst slum twenty years ago, the general e ect was of a district taking a terrible physical beating and certainly desperately poor. when i saw the north end again in 1959, i was amazed at the change. dozens and dozens of buildings had been rehabilitated. mingled all among the buildings were an incredible number of splendid stores . stunning changes occurred despite the opinions of experts who looked at the north end as an irrecoverable place or, even worse, a  civic shame . planners believed that  everything they have learned as planners told them the north end hadto be a slum in the last stage of depravity . bankers maintained that there was no sense in lending money into the north end because it was slum .
assessments of this kind were the result of super cial comparisons between the real physical conditions of certain areas with abstract ideasabout how neighborhoods should look like and, most of all,be.
3above all, as jacobs maintains, these assessments did not consider the local social capital, neither the complexity of di erent plans, investments and e orts made by individuals to improve their life and their dwellings. in this way, experts reduced the complexity of thesocial system into simple aggregated problems , without considering which, in practice, were people s real opportu nities. in general, what jacobs demonstrates is that the issue of poverty in cities is a more complex matter. what in the 1960s was often assumed to be a slum, in reality was o ering chances and space for improvements.
in short, while orthodox planners looked at the presence of slums as a problem to be solved, jane jacobs recognizes certain genuine andbene cial role for such places, above all for newcomers who, with the passage of time, are often and soon assimilated in city s life. however,not all slums are positively perceived by jane jacobs. she underscores when and why the concentration of poor people may become a public problem only in these cases, she speaks of perpetual slums . in doing so, jane jacobs proposes a clear distinction between neighborhoodsopen to unslumming processes and places of perpetual state of poverty, i.e. slums which show no signs of social or economic improvement with time, or which regress after a little improvement .
perpetual slums are the opposite of unslummed or unslumming neighborhoods. negative common features of all perpetual slums are  unattractiveness , low sense of belonging  4and simultaneously falling population and increasing overcrowding .
jane jacobs identi es three main negative conditions that contribute to existence of perpetual slums. the rst condition regards the spatial con guration of the neighborhood. she contends that neighborhoods that are built and designed in such a way that civilized public life in the street is discouraged are less prone to undergo unslumming processes. the issue is that without extensive and complex networking among people there are fewer possibilities that a sense of communitywill emerge.
5on the contrary, the rise of lively and cohesive environments is more likely to emerge when the spatial con gurations of neighborhoods facilitates intense and spontaneous interactions among people . from this perspective, the main idea of jane jacobs is that con gurations of this kind emerge organically over time and rarely are built all at once from scratch .
the second condition for the persistence of slums is discrimination.
this condition regards a widespread negative judgment about particular groups of people . when this occurs in cities, speci c social groups are segregated and isolated from the rest of city s life, reducing enormously their opportunities for new exchanges 1segregation can be de ned as the extent to which particular groups are over or underrepresented in particular neighborhoods. the most common measure of segregation is the dissimilarity index which measures the evenness with which two identi ed groups are distributed across geographical components that together make up a larger geographical area .
2it is a shift that is similar to what we see in the general economic inequality debate.
recently, relative poverty has become a dominanttheme , while absolute poverty used to be the primary focus long into the twentieth century.3for instance, experts underscore that the north end bumps right up against industry , working places and commerce are mingled with residences , high concentration of dwelling units , little park land or children play in the streets , etc. .
4 perpetual slums are unable to hold enough its population for unslumming dull neighborhoods inevitably fail to draw newcomers by choice .
5a sense of community can be de ned as a particular state where individuals realize that all other human beings are potential collaborators and they are capable of re cognizing the mutual bene t of cooperation .e. buitelaar, s. cozzolino cities xxx xxx xxx 2 and interactions with diverse groups holding di erent knowledge and resources. only when discrimination is broken and it is a long and slow process slumming can be overcome by favoring the emergence of new exchanges and interactions. some neighborhoods are apt to undergo sudden wholesale desertions by their nonslums populations.  this gives a slum its initial opportunity to form .
the third condition for perpetual slums is the lack of newcomers. in this regard jane jacobs maintains that unslumming processes need newcomers thus to contribute to a slow and incremental internal social self diversi cation as well as the gradual assimilation of strangers in a civilized fashion . the north end is still getting some immigrants.  newcomers add to the population diversi cation. the indispensable foundation for this added population is the self diversi cation and stability of the former slum population .
2.1. lessons for today s segregation debate we believe three elements from jane jacobs writing on slums are worth further exploring and developing in the light of current policiesand theories behind policies that are targeting economic segregation.
first, is her focus on poor neighborhoods rather than on the economic di erences between neighborhoods. levelling economic di erences between neighborhoods is an explicit or implicit goal of today s de segregation policies. second, her focus is on how people living in slums can improve their own lives and can be enabled to do so, rather than on changing the relatively homogenous socio economic composition of those slums because of negative neighborhood e ects. and third, when she discusses slumming, unslumming and perpetual slums,she explicitly brings the time dimension into the picture, while polices focusing on segregation and wealth distributions tend to focus on staticsnapshots.
3. the importance of focusing on absolute neighborhood poverty 6 jacobs concern with perpetual slums slums in general shows that she puts more emphasis on absolute neighborhood poverty than on the uneven distribution of wealth over di erent neighborhoods, that is, on economic segregation. moreover, she focuses on the conditions ofeconomic development and self regeneration, regardless of the economic status of the neighborhood. in this section, we advance the moral relevance of absolute poverty of people and neighborhoods. this particularly relevant in times when science and policy seem preoccupied with relative deprivation.
3.1. moral relevance of segregation the moral relevance of economic inequality or relative poverty has been debated quite extensively in the economic and political philosophical literature . to our knowledge, this has not yet been done speci cally for segregation . segregation is like inequality a relative concept, since it refers to the extent to which groups are over or underrepresented in some neighborhoods compared to other groups . is the fact that the rich and the poor live more orless apart from one another of moral importance in itself  frankfurt says about economic inequality that it is not as such of particular moral importance. with respect to the distribution of economic assets, what is important from the point of view of morality is not that everyone should have the same but that each should have enough .i f everyone had enough, it would be of no moral consequence whethersome had more than others . this is the doctrine of su ciency , which is a distinct theory or idea about justice that di ers from the doctrine of egalitarianism or egalitarian justice.
7the concept of su ciency has also been emphasized by nobel laureate amartya sen who argues that the fact that some people have a lower standard of living than others is certainlyproof of inequality, but by itself it cannot be a proof of poverty unless we know something more about the standard of living that these people do in fact enjoy . the concept of absolute poverty tells us something about the standard of living of a person, while re lative poverty does not . some respond to this notion of absolute poverty by arguing that it is relative too. they often refer to the fact that poverty thresholds change over time poverty now is di erent from the late 19th century  or that it varies over space, from country to country.
however, this type of relativeness is quite di erent from the idea how someone s income position relates to others within the same society at thesame time absoluteness of needs is not the same as their xity over time. the relative approach sees deprivation in terms of a person orhousehold being able to achieve less than what others in that society do, and this relativeness is not to be confused with variation over time .
an overemphasis on inequality might obscure our sight on poverty.
if there is a decline in prosperity because of a recession or depression, leading to great misery, starvation and hardship among a large part of the population, inequality statistics might not pick that up since the relative picture need not change . put in extreme terms there can be perfect equality below the povertythreshold and, alternatively, there can be great inequality with no one in poverty. for instance, two homeless people are perfectly equal in their homelessness, but generally very poor  at the same time. on the contrary, bill gates is estimated by forbes to be almost twenty times wealthier than richard branson, but very few consider the latter to be poor.
we could say that for economic segregation, the same reasoning applies as for economic inequality it is of less importance that others have more material resources than that one has enough, in his her own neighborhood . the fact that people live physically separated does not change this moral claim. a slum , like poverty, is an absolute concept, not relative. a neighborhood is a slum or not, we do not say itis slummer or less slum than another. once a neighborhood shifts below a particular culturally and politically determined prosperitythreshold, it becomes a slum. in the death and life of great american cities , jane jacobs, too, seems to take an absolutist position as she isconcerned with slums, slumming and unslumming, and much less with segregation and desegregation, even though she mentions it occasionally. in fact, she maintains that   we cannot conclude that middle class families or upper class families build good neighborhoods, and poor families fail to. for example, within the poverty of the north end in boston, within the poverty of the west greenwich village waterfront neighborhoods, within the poverty of the slaughterhouse district in chicago, good neighborhoods were created. meantime, within the once upper class grace and serenity of baltimore s beautiful eutaw place, within the onetime upper class solidity of boston s south end, within the culturally privileged purlieus of new york s morningside heights, within miles upon miles of dull, respectable middle class grey area, bad neighborhoods were created, neighborhoods whose apathy and internal failure grew greater with time instead of less . she continues to hunt for city neighborhood touchstones of success in high standards of physical 6this section is largely derived from buitelaar et al. .7and distinct from other forms of justice such as utilitarianism, procedural justice, framework justice , intergenerational justice, and others . some of them may be relevant to slums as well but we explore their implications no further in this paper.e. buitelaar, s. cozzolino cities xxx xxx xxx 3 facilities, or in supposedly competent non problem populations, or in nostalgic memories of town life, is a waste of time. it evades the meat of the question, which is the problem of what city neighborhoods do, if anything, that may be socially and economically useful in cities themselves, and how they do it.  3.2. deprivation of what the issue of spatial primary goods ina theory of justice from 1971 and political liberalism from 1993 john rawls advances the idea of justice as fairness , part of which is an  index ,o f social primary goods , that everyone should possess or have access to, as free and equal persons a. basic rights and liberties b.
freedom of movement and choice of occupation against a background of diverse opportunities c. powers and prerogatives of o ces and positions of responsibility in the political and economic institutions of thebasic structure d. income and wealth and nally, e. the social bases of self respect . the exact scope and demarcation of these goods is a contextual or place and time speci c matter. the important point here is the existence of a notion of social primary goods and the idea of a su ciency threshold of such goods, under which someone is de ned as poor .
in the case of slums, too, a large part of the population is deprived of the social primary goods, particularly of su cient wealth. but additionally , the neighborhood itself is usually deprived of some basic social and physical conditions. therefore, , in transfers the idea of rawls primary goods to space by de ning spatial primary goods that people in cities should possess or have access to. moroni distinguishes between four spatial primary goods decent housing, access to basic transport, availability of green areas and a safe living environment. this is the very minimum people should have access to in their neighborhood. again, changes and ex tensions of the list are possible and maybe necessary . and indeed, jacobs in dark age ahead from 2004 is very explicit and elaborate in identifying more and other spatial primary goods , without referring to them as such, such as affordable housing, publicly funded transportation, water and sewagesystems, re protection, public health and safety inspections and enforcement, schools, public libraries, large scale public recreation facil ities, parks, ambulances and other emergency services .
others have added that the possession of or access to primary goods may be necessary but not su cient as people s capabilities may not allow them to use such goods properly . for instance, the presence of schools in the vicinity is of little help if people are denied access or if they lack the learning capacity to attend classes and pass school tests.
4. homogeneity of neighborhoods and its e ects on individuals neighborhoods without unslumming capacity rather than unequal neighborhoods is jacobs major concern. however, many urban renewal policies are explicitly focused on levelling wealth and problems over space. one of the key assumptions behind such policies is that the better the economic composition of the neighborhood, the better it is for instance for individual income and wealth and for labor market chances. this policy theory has received a lot of attention in the urban literature.
segregation is the aggregate distributional result of a spatial sorting process in which both preferences and abilities a ect individual households residential location decisions. tammaru et al. show that economic inequality usually translates into economic segregation, but not necessarily so. economic inequality is a necessary condition for economic segregation , not a su cient one. whether, when and to what extent this occurs depends on a country s welfare andhousing system and on a city s spatial and housing policies . in other words, the spatial sorting of economically unequal individuals is a contextual matter.
the neighborhood composition becomes relevant from a societal and policy perspective if it is not simply the spatial result of a sorting process, but if it also has additional positive or negative  e ects on those people s opportunities or income position. these are called neighborhood e ects . in public policy, there is a long history of aiming for class heterogeneity in neighborhoods, as it is assumed to add variety and enrich people s lives, to promote tolerance of social and cultural di erences, to broaden the educational in uence on children, to encourage exposure to alternative lives . however, identifying and proving the presence of neighborhood e ects and linking them to processes of segregation is complex.
first, this is complex because segregation does not necessarily lead to neighborhood e ects. if negative e ects of the composition of neighborhoods are found, those might be selection  e ects rather than neighborhood e ects . put di erently in the case of selection e ects, neighborhoods do not make people worse o , people who are worse o move to particular neighborhoods, for instance because of the availability of a ordable housing. such sorting processes are driven by people s preferences and opportunities . it has turned out to be di cult in empirical research to completely isolate neighborhood effects and distinguish them from selection e ects . it is an important reason for paul cheshire sconclusion that there is surprisingly little evidence that living in poor neighborhoods makes people poorer and erodes their life chances, in dependently of those factors that contribute to their poverty in the rst place .
second, not all neighborhood e ects are due to processes of segregation. in the literature, some refer to the importance of neighborhood infrastructure for the accessibility of jobs and schools . and indeed, accessibility seems vital for neighborhoods and the people who live in them. in the previous section, this is evenindicated as one of the spatial primary goods . however, the absence of such a good is not necessarily, or solely, the result of segregation and the economic composition of the neighborhood, rather of poor transportation planning.
given the complexity of the logical causal relationship between neighborhood composition and individual behavior, and the scant empirical proof for negative neighborhood e ects, it is perhaps not surprising that neighborhood policies aimed at socialmixing are often found to be ine ective in improving people s job opportunities, wealth and neighborhood satisfaction . they are more likely to be e ective in increasing property values, tax bases and government control over neighborhoods .
5. a dynamic view on people and places with her focus on the perpetuity of neighborhood poverty , jane jacobs clearly indicates it is important to take a dynamic perspective on poverty. perpetual slums areplaces that are incapable to hold or attract the people that can help them unslum .
in current policy and academic studies, urban segregation or neighborhood composition is usually measured statically. the mostcommon indicator for segregation, the dissimilarity index , measures  theevenness with which two identi ed groups are distributed across geographical components that together make up a larger geographical area . ine. buitelaar, s. cozzolino cities xxx xxx xxx 4 longitudinal urban studies, this measurement is repeated annually. although such numbers tell us something about the overall development of segregation, they remain snapshots that miss essential information about the underlying dynamics . at least two issues are underemphasized by those statistics.
first, those yearly segregation snapshots do not tell us anything about which neighborhoods show concentrations of wealth in whichyear. in theory, in year 1 neighborhood x might contain the greatest concentration of people in the lowest income decile, while in year 2 it might be neighborhood y. if income distributions over neighborhoods vary as this example illustrates, segregation is much di erent from a situation in which the same neighborhood containsthe greatest concentration of poor people year after year.
second, though related to the rst point, segregation snapshots obscure residential mobility. in theory, again, a neighborhood might always contain the greatest concentration of people in the lowest income decile, but if this group renews and changes every year, we have a di erent issue than when it remains the same and people cannot do not move out to other places. in the rst case, a slum might be a stepping stone for the newly arrived toward other neighborhoods in a city, in the second case it is a dead end, as jacobs emphasizes as well.
the alluvial in fig. 1 illustrates a way to capture some  neighborhood dynamics. it shows, for the city of rotterdam, the spatial distribution of those living in the two lowest income deciles over the neighborhoods in 2003 and the residential mobility of these people since. this groups appears to be rather immobile in 2012, 77 still lives in the same neighborhood as in 2003, 13 moved to a neighborhood with a lower share of low income households, and almost 10 moved to a neighborhood with a higher share of low income inhabitants .
following neighborhoods in time, and following  people in neighborhoods in time, provides us with more informationabout whether slums are perpetual or are prone to processes of unslumming . nowadays, the availability of detailed andaccurate longitudinal datasets and of statistical and econometric techniques to process these data, allow for such jacobsian evolutionary analyses, even intergenerationally .
6. conclusion and policy implications the abandonment of the word slum in developed countries might indicate a shift in attention away from absolute neighborhood poverty to relative neighborhood poverty instead. the focus on relative neighborhood rather than absolute neighborhood poverty may, however, lead to targeting the wrong social problem. from a moral perspective, the possession or access to a minimum level of social and spatial primary goods is more or at least as relevant. jacobs writing on slums is still very relevant today in discussing such goods and in establishing an urban policy agenda aimed at their provision. there is, however, not only the moral perspective on segregation and policies aimed at creating economic desegregation . from both a logical and empirical point of view, social mixing policies are unlikely to increase people s wealth or their chances of wealth improvement.
however, being critical of social mixing policies does not mean there is no room for place based policies per se. distinguishing between placed based and people based policies and discrediting the former is too categorical. certain place based policies can make an important contribution to providing social and spatial primarygoods, such as good infrastructure and decent housing. urban design, for instance, may play an important role in creating the necessary spatial conditions .
 in fact, as jacobs states  design can provide the means to the people to keep a civilized public life .
nevertheless, in case of depressed environments, small physical interventions are preferable both to slum clearance and large scale structural top down interven tions . tactics, according to jacobs, are light actions aiming at breaking the perpetuity of slums by creating the condition to fig. 1. changes in residential location of low income inhabitants of rotterdam, 2003 2012.e. buitelaar, s. cozzolino cities xxx xxx xxx 5 increase the livability of neighborhoods and ameliorate their infrastructures . in general, their goal is to improve and intensify social interactions in public spaces, increase their level of attractiveness, and create new opportunities for local people .
however, following jacobs, planning interventions and policies may fail if they do not take the time dimension into the picture distinguishing between neighborhoods that are perpetually slumming and those that are unslumming . in the latter case, despite the supporting measures that can be taken, jane jacobs fully recognizes that unslumming is a process of steady but gradual change , with a fundamental role played by self improvements and spontaneous ac tions. in her view, governments should rst of all facilitate those actions instead of actively boosting heterogeneity and social mixes.
references