book review tiit tammaru, szymon marci nczak, maarten van ham, and sako musterd , socioeconomic segregation in european capital cities east meets west .
socio economic segregation in european capital cities east meets west is an ambitious and fascinating volume published at an auspicious moment. the unfolding effects of the global economic crisis and european austerity policies, the impact of occupy movements, resurging concerns about gentrification, and the debate generated by piketty s capital in the twenty first century mean that there is an unprecedented demand for new evidence about urban inequalities. socio economic segregation in european capital cities takes a major step in this direction by examining how the residential segregation of socioeconomic groups changed during the first decade of the 21st century in 13 european cities . the book s geographic scope especially the inclusion of five cities from post socialist europe and its focus on socioeconomic rather than ethnic divisions set the volume apart from most previous work on residential segregation.
the book begins with an introductory chapter in which the editors argue that the social cohesion of cities is undermined when people from different socioeconomic groups live apart from one another in stratified and segregated neighborhoods. they contend that the socioeconomic segregation of urban space is likely to be an increasing problem across europe as economic inequality grows, welfare support is curtailed, and housing is increasingly commodified and distributed by the market. the introduction then outlines how structural factors and historical developments intersect to shape levels of socioeconomic segregation across european cities. this conceptual framework and the book s emphasis on crossnational comparison are important innovations that make it far more cohesive than many previous edited volumes.
the introduction is followed by 13 strong empirical chapters written by contributors. each of these chapters analyzes socioeconomic segregation in a particular european city using census or population register data covering the first decade of the 21st century . to enable trends and patterns to be compared across cities, a relatively harmonious set of familiar analytic tools such as indices of segregation, isolation, and dissimilarity are applied in a similar fashion in each empirical chapter. there are also a large number of maps to help readers get a feel for the changing geographies of socioeconomic segregation. importantly, many chapters build ethnicity or immigration status into their analyses to give a richer picture of the multidimensional nature of residential segregation. it is perhaps a pity that this was not attempted for all thirteen cities.
although interpreting the book s comparative insights demands a cover to cover reading, national specialists will have little trouble concentrating only on particular cities of interest because each empirical chapter is organized as a standalone and conventionally structured research paper. this format inevitably means that there is some duplication of material between and within chapters, but overall the editors and contributors have done an impressive job of minimizing repetition. finally, the book concludes with an illuminating editorial synthesis of the main findings. broadly speaking the main conclusions are as follows  journal of urban affairs, volume 00, number 0, pages 1 2.
copyright c circlecopyrt2016 urban affairs association all rights of reproduction in any form reserved.
issn 0735 2166.2iijournal of urban affairs i ivol. 00 no. 0 2016 1. levels of socioeconomic segregation in major european cities are modest but generally increasing.
2. trends and patterns of socioeconomic segregation vary considerably across major european cities in ways that are shaped by structural factors , institutional arrangements, and uneven patterns of historical development .
while these conclusions perhaps come as little surprise, the main value of the book lies in the scope, depth, and rigor of the evidence marshaled to support them. nevertheless, readers may wish to reflect on a few points when interpreting the findings. one quibble possibly derives from the book s origins in a conference in that it is not entirely clear from the text why the thirteen case study cities were selected and why several other large and influential european capitals such as berlin, brussels, paris, or warsaw were not examined. more importantly, all readers are strongly advised to thoroughly and critically review the book s editorial introduction and conclusions and  the data and methods sections of all chapters of interest. this is important because these highlight the methodological issues and caveats that must be borne in mind when comparing findings across cities. foremost amongst these is the complexity of comparing results when different definitions of neighborhood and different measures of socioeconomic status have been used in different cities.
although the editors explain why the contributors have used a range of measures of socioeconomic status, several contributors argue strongly for the superiority of their own approach, and a clearer editorial judgement about how best to conceptualize and measure socioeconomic status in studies of residential segregation might have been helpful for future research.
overall, however, these issues do not detract from what is an informative, accessible, and important book that will be of enormous interest to anyone concerned about social and spatial inequalities in developed world cities. it will be extremely useful for scholars concerned about general patterns of social inequality as well as specialists studying sociospatial division, gentrification, or segregation . the book could also be used to help teach courses on urban sociology and geography, housing studies, or social policy. although the book is ostensibly marketed to policymakers and practitioners, the absence of causal analysis and practical recommendations for combating socioeconomic segregation mean that these groups may wish to confine their reading to the introduction and conclusion chapters freely available online .
these contain an excellent summary and synthesis of the main findings from each chapter. indeed, given the timeliness of the book it is a shame that it is so expensive.
reference piketty, t. . capital in the twenty first century . translated by arthur goldhammer. cambridge, ma harvard university press.
rory coulter university of cambridge rcc46 cam.ac.uk