international economic review vol. 61, no. 4, november 2020 doi 10.1111 iere.12466 the measurement of income segregation  by casilda lasso de la vega and oscar volij1 university of the basque country, spain ben gurion university, israel we examine the problem of measuring the extent to which students with different income levels attend separate schools. unless rich and poor attend the same schools in the same proportions, some segregation will exist. since income is a continuous cardinal variable, however, the rich poor dichotomy is necessarily arbitrary and renders any application of a binary segregation measure arti cial. this article provides an axiomatic characterization of a measure of income segregation that takes into account the cardinal nature of income. this measure satis es an empirically useful decomposition by subdistricts.
1.introduction segregation is an attribute of school districts.2it refers to the extent to which pupils belonging to different demographic groups attend separate schools. segregation measures compare districts which may differ both in the demographic distributions of their pupils and in the allocation of pupils across schools. when demographic groups are classi ed according to ethnicity, we are dealing with ethnic segregation. when they are classi ed according to gender, segregation is labeled as gender segregation. in this article, we are interested in income segregation, which can be observed when groups are classi ed according to income levels.
the criterion according to which we choose to classify individuals is not an innocuous one.
when dealing with ethnicity or gender, for instance, there is no natural order of groups and indeed most of the ethnic segregation indices in the literature treat ethnic groups symmetrically. in other contexts, however, groups can be ordered according to some natural criterion.
for example, pupils could be classi ed according to the educational level of their parents into having completed a primary, secondary or higher education. in these cases, it may not be appropriate to treat groups symmetrically, and in fact, indices have been developed that take into account the ordering of the groups. a richer context yet is the one of income segregation.
not only does income induce an order of the groups but it also induces a natural metric on them. here too, segregation indices have been proposed that take into account the ordering of income levels and also their magnitude.3 school segregation, and its counterpart school diversity, are twin topics that regularly arise in political forums and in the media. diversity and segregation are not restricted to race. in  manuscript received january 2019 revised october 2019.
1we are indebted to david m. frankel. this article bene ted greatly from his generous collaboration. we also thank the editor in charge for his useful comments. finally, we thank the spanish ministerio de econom a y competitividad and the gobierno vasco for research support. this research has used as a source of information databases of the education quality agency of chile . the authors thank the education quality agency for access to information. all the results of the study are the responsibility of the authors and do not compromise the institution. please address correspondence to oscar volij, department of economics, ben gurion university, p .o.b 653, beer sheva 84105 .
e mail ovolij bgu.ac.il .
2more generally, segregation is an attribute of a collection of organizational units. for expositional purposes, we focus on school districts, whose organizational units are, unsurprisingly, schools.
3for a necessarily incomplete list of ethnic segregation indices, see massey and denton and reardon and firebaugh . for segregation among ordered categories, see, for example, reardon . for indices that exploit the cardinal nature of income, see jargowsky and kim and jargowsky .
1479  by the economics department of the university of pennsylvania and the osaka university institute of social and economic research association 1480 lasso de la vega and volij the united states, for instance, programs exist that aim at increasing socioeconomic diversity in schools and creating more integrated public schools. recently, in its concern that elite institutions enroll students who are diverse in every aspect except economically, the new york times has developed the college access index, which attempts to measure economic diversity at top colleges, and which is published every year.
recent empirical studies suggest that income segregation may affect educational outcomes.
students who have higher quality peer groups tend to have better educational outcomes , an effect for which evidence has been found to be causal . as pupils with higher family income tend to have higher ability, income segregation may be a signi cant source of differential peer effects across schools. indeed, the ndings of mayer suggest that an increase in income segregation between census tracts or school districts tends to lower the achievement of lowability pupils and raise that of high ability pupils.
despite the potential importance of income segregation, there is wide disagreement about how to measure it. several income segregation indices have been proposed in the literature and some of their properties have been pointed out. some researchers have used ethnic segregation indices, such as the dissimilarity index of jahn et al. . other indices, notably the rank order information theory index of reardon , take account of the ordinal nature of income categories. finally, some indices treat income as a cardinal variable, the main example being jargowsky s neighborhood sorting index.
many attempts to measure income segregation consist of transforming a district in which individuals are classi ed by income into one in which they are classi ed by dichotomous categories so that a standard ethnic segregation index can be applied. for instance, fong and shibuya propose a poverty line to partition the population into rich and poor and apply an existing two group segregation index. a more sophisticated approach measures income segregation by averaging the two group segregation indices associated with all possible poverty lines. see, for instance, reardon and the references therein. the main problem with these approaches is that small changes in pupils incomes may induce large changes in the demographic distribution of both district and schools with the corresponding large change in income segregation. hence, the resulting segregation orders fail to satisfy continuity, which is a property that any income segregation order should satisfy.
in this article, instead of directly adapting an existing ethnic segregation index to the context of income segregation, we adapt the properties of standard ethnic segregation measures to the new context and investigate their implications. speci cally, we show that these properties characterize a continuous index of income segregation, which we call the school separation index. this index measures segregation as the difference between the district s variability and the average variability of its schools, variability being measured by the mean logarithmic deviation. to the best of our knowledge, this is the rst axiomatic derivation of an income segregation measure.4 before we move to the formal model, we discuss the concept of income segregation we have in mind and its relation to income inequality. income segregation is an attribute of school districts, which may differ both in their allocation of pupils across schools and in the distribution of income across pupils. although changes in the former will not affect the district s income inequality, changes in the latter will typically affect, however measured, its income segregation. yet, some authors propose to disentangle the two concepts as much as possible. reardon , for instance, proposes that income segregation be maximal if and only if within each school, all pupils have the same income, no matter what the income distribution of the district may be. in order to illustrate this requirement, which reardon calls scale interpretability , consider the following districts  4measures of segregation among unordered categories such as ethnic groups have been axiomatized by echenique and fryer , frankel and volij , and hutchens .
 14682354, 2020, 4, downloaded from https onlinelibrary.wiley.com doi 10.1111 iere.12466 by tu delft, wiley online library on 29 01 2024 . see the terms and conditions on wiley online library for rules of use oa articles are governed by the applicable creative commons license the measurement of income segregation 1481 x 10 20 y 10 20 106 school 1 100 0 school 1 100 0 school 2 0 100 school 2 0 100 both districts have two schools, one attended by the rich and the other by the poor. however, whereas the poor in both districts have an income of 10, the rich have an income of 20 in district xand an income of 20 million in district y. by virtue of scale interpretability, they are equally and maximally segregated. this is so even though the difference between rich and poor in xis negligible compared to the corresponding difference in y. the idea of income segregation that we have in mind, however, is inconsistent with the above requirement. in fact our axioms will imply that district xexhibits less income segregation than district ysince, although in both districts poor and rich attend separate schools, district yexhibits a much higher income inequality than x. in other words, according to our concept of income segregation, the extent to which students with different incomes attend different schools is magni ed by the inequality of students incomes.
indices that satisfy scale interpretability aim to capture a concept of pure segregation , namely, one that is independent of income inequality. in contrast, the idea of segregation we are aiming for in this article is a hybrid one in which pure segregation and income inequality interact. needless to say, both kinds of indices may provide useful information.
in order to further illustrate the difference between the concept of pure income segregation and the one that we propose, consider the following two districts  x 200 300 y 100 200 300 400 school 1 20 0 school 1 10 10 0 0 school 2 0 20 school 2 0 0 10 10 district xconsists of two schools, one attended by the rich and one attended by the poor.
since all the poor have an income of 200 and all the rich have an income of 300, according to the above requirement, xhas maximum segregation. if we now make half the poor even poorer and half the rich even richer, we obtain district y. according to scale interpretability segregation is reduced. the reason for this reduction is that although nobody moved from one school to the other, and although the poor and the rich still go to separate schools, both schools became more diverse as a result of the pauperization of half of the already poor and of the enrichment of half of the already rich. in contrast, according to our notion of segregation, the increase in income inequality observed in the transition from xtoymay magnify instead of reduce the income segregation already existing in x the poor and the rich still attend separate schools, and the difference between rich and poor became more striking.
the article is organized as follows. after introducing the basic notation in section 2, section 3 presents, among others, the income segregation indices that are the focus of the article.
in section 4, we propose a list of axioms which are used in section 5 to present our characterization result. finally, section 6 offers an empirical illustration of the behavior of the school separation index .
2.notation as mentioned in the introduction, segregation is an attribute of a collection of organizational units, such as schools or neighborhoods, which are taken as given. for empirical purposes, segregation measures are most reliable when there is a natural choice of these units. in  14682354, 2020, 4, downloaded from https onlinelibrary.wiley.com doi 10.1111 iere.12466 by tu delft, wiley online library on 29 01 2024 . see the terms and conditions on wiley online library for rules of use oa articles are governed by the applicable creative commons license 1482 lasso de la vega and volij the case of residential segregation, for instance, census tracts seem to be arbitrary and consequently, the resulting segregation measurements are vulnerable to the modi able areal unit problem slight changes in the de nition of an organizational unit may lead to large changes in measured segregation. in the case of school segregation, however, schools seem an unquestionable choice as organizational units. for this reason, we focus on school segregation.5 aschool is a nite collection of pairs angbracketleft,..., angbracketright, where for each g 1,..., g, yg 0 is an income level and ng 0 represents the number of pupils with income level yg.
pairs will be called income groups. for notational convenience, we allow schools to have two income groups with the same income. in that case, however, if they are combined, the school does not change for example, the schools angbracketleft, angbracketrightand angbracketleft angbracketright are regarded as the same school. also, if we permute the income groups the school does not change that is, for any permutation 1,..., g 1,..., g , angbracketleft,..., angbracketright   angbracketleft,y ,..., ,y angbracketright.
for any school c angbracketleft,..., angbracketright,l e t c summationtextg g 1ngygdenote the total income of school c, and nc summationtextg g 1ngits total enrollment. if nc 0,cis an empty school. empty schools will play no role in the article but are needed for notational convenience. if cis not empty, we denote by c c ncits mean income, and by c angbracketleft angbracketrightthesmoothed school that is obtained from cby redistributing c s total income equally among its pupils. for any school c angbracketleft,..., angbracketrightand scalar 0, let c angbracketleft,..., angbracketrightdenote the school that is obtained from cby multiplying the number of people in each income group by and let c angbracketleft,..., angbracketrightdenote the school that is obtained from cby multiplying each pupil s income by . for any two schools c angbracketleft,..., angbracketright and c prime angbracketleft,..., angbracketright,l e t c c prime angbracketleft,..., ,,..., angbracketright denote the result of combining the two schools into a single school. we say that a sequence of schools cm angbracketleft,..., angbracketrightconverges to school c angbracketleft,..., angbracketright, denoted cm c, if for all g 1,..., g, the sequence of pairs converges to . we denote by cthe class of nonempty schools where pupils have positive incomes.
adistrict c1,..., ck is a nite collection of schools at least one of which is not empty. we identify any district with the district that is obtained from it by deleting all its empty schools.
if we permute the schools, the district does not change for example, for any permutation   1,..., k 1,..., k , c1,..., ck c ,..., c . with some abuse of notation we will denote a typical district by x ck k k. for any district x,l e t nx summationtext c xncdenote the total attendance of x,l e t x summationtext c x c denote its total income, and let x x nxdenote its mean income. for any district xand scalar 0, let x c c xdenote the district that is obtained from xby multiplying the number of people in each school by and let x c   c xdenote the district that is obtained from xby multiplying each pupil s income by .f o r any two districts x c1,..., ck and y c prime 1,..., c prime k prime ,l e t x unionmultiy c1,..., ck,c prime 1,..., c prime k prime  denote the district that results from combining the schools of xandyinto a single district.
we denote by dthe set of all districts where all students have positive incomes.
a district is simple if it is of the form angbracketleft angbracketright,..., angbracketleft angbracketright for some k, that is, if each school contains a single income group. for any district x c1,..., ck ,l e t c  c1 ckbe the school that is obtained by combining the schools of xinto a single school, and let r nc1 nxc,...,nck nxc be the district that is obtained from x by reallocating its students so that each school maintains its enrollment and all schools have the same income distribution . we will henceforth call r the completely integrated version of x. for instance, if c1 angbracketleft, angbracketrightand c2 angbracketleft angbracketrightare two schools, and x c1,c2 , then c c1 c2 angbracketleft,, angbracketright, and r   angbracketleft,, angbracketright, angbracketleft,, angbracketright .
5also, school segregation, as opposed to residential segregation, is a context in which geography seems not to play a role. for an attempt to measure segregation taking geography into account, see dawkins .
 14682354, 2020, 4, downloaded from https onlinelibrary.wiley.com doi 10.1111 iere.12466 by tu delft, wiley online library on 29 01 2024 . see the terms and conditions on wiley online library for rules of use oa articles are governed by the applicable creative commons license the measurement of income segregation 1483 3.segregation and inequality 3.1. inequality indices. income segregation is related to income inequality in two ways.
on the one hand, the higher the income inequality of a district is, the higher the potential for income segregation in it. on the other hand, ceteris paribus, for any given level of income inequality of a district, the more economically diverse are its schools, the lower its income segregation. given this relation, before we de ne measures of income segregation, we need to introduce indices of income inequality.
aninequality index i assigns to each school ca real number, i which is meant to capture its level of income inequality. the following are examples of prominent income inequality indices. the rst one consists of the class of generalized entropy indices and the second is the variance .
example 1.for rthegeneralized entropy index ,i c 0, , is de ned as follows for all c angbracketleft,..., angbracketright c, i     1  summationtextg g 1ng nc bracketleftbig parenleftbig yg  c parenrightbig   1 bracketrightbig if 0,1   summationtextg g 1ng ncln parenleftbig  c yg parenrightbig if 0  summationtextg g 1ngyg  c ln parenleftbig yg  c parenrightbig if 1.
when 0, the associated generalized entropy index i0is known as theil s second measure of income inequality .
example 2.the variance assigns to each school the variance of its income distribution. formally, var, is de ned as follows for all c angbracketleft,..., angbracketright, var 1 ncg summationdisplay g 1ng2.
we shall sometimes speak of the income inequality in the whole district, and to measure it, we will apply an inequality index to the combination of all its schools into a single school. in particular, with a slight abuse of notation for any district x c1,..., ck , we will write i fori, the inequality of the district s income distribution.
3.2. segregation orders and indices. a segregation order de ned on dis a complete and transitive relation followsorcurlyond.a n income segregation index , or segregation index for short, sassigns to each district, xa real number, s, which is meant to capture its level of segregation. we shall maintain the convention of using calligraphic capital letters to denote segregation indices. a segregation index represents a segregation order followsorcurlyif for any two districts x,y,x followsorcurlyy s s. the following are examples of income segregation indices. for any district x c1,..., ck ,  t h e school separation index is de ned by ssi summationdisplay c xnc nxln parenleftbigg x  c parenrightbigg    t h e variance segregation index is de ned by v 1 nx summationdisplay c xnc2   14682354, 2020, 4, downloaded from https onlinelibrary.wiley.com doi 10.1111 iere.12466 by tu delft, wiley online library on 29 01 2024 . see the terms and conditions on wiley online library for rules of use oa articles are governed by the applicable creative commons license 1484 lasso de la vega and volij  jargowsky s neighborhood sorting index is de ned by6 nsi radicalbigg v var.
finally, given any income inequality index i,  t h e segregation index induced by i is de ned by i i summationdisplay c xnc nxi.
in order to understand the idea behind the last class of indices, note that the sum summationtext c xnc nxi is an average of the level of income inequality, as measured by i, within the schools of x, and can be seen as a measure of the economic diversity of such schools. clearly, this diversity cannot contribute to the segregation of x. thus, the segregation of xas measured by iis what remains from the district s income inequality after we deduct the economic diversity exhibited by the schools.
an interesting feature of the segregation index induced by iis that when each school has zero income variation, the district s segregation coincides with its income inequality as measured by i, and as a result the higher the income inequality is, the higher the district s segregation is. this means that the segregation index induced by iis not pure since it does not ful ll the requirement that segregation be maximal when schools exhibit no diversity. nevertheless, one could use the segregation index induced by ito de ne a measure of pure segregation by the ratio i i. with this de nition, we see that the segregation index induced by an inequality index iis in fact the product of an index of pure segregation and the associated income inequality of the district.
interestingly, the segregation index induced by the generalized entropy index i0isssi.t o see this, note that i0 i0  summationdisplay c xg summationdisplay g 1ng nxln parenleftbigg x yg parenrightbigg  summationdisplay c xnc nxg summationdisplay g 1ng ncln parenleftbigg x  c c yg parenrightbigg  summationdisplay c xnc nxln parenleftbigg x  c parenrightbigg  summationdisplay c xnc nxg summationdisplay g 1ng ncln parenleftbigg c  g parenrightbigg  ssi summationdisplay c xnc nxi0, which, after a rearrangement of terms, yields the desired result. a similar proof shows that the segregation index induced by the variance, var,i sv.7 6kim and jargowski propose an analogous segregation index, where the standard deviation is replaced by the gini coef cient.
7this implies that jargowsky s nsi is ordinally equivalent to the pure segregation index induced by var.
 14682354, 2020, 4, downloaded from https onlinelibrary.wiley.com doi 10.1111 iere.12466 by tu delft, wiley online library on 29 01 2024 . see the terms and conditions on wiley online library for rules of use oa articles are governed by the applicable creative commons license the measurement of income segregation 1485 4.axioms we now list several desirable properties of an income segregation order. we start with three fundamental axioms that convey the basic idea of what it means for a district to be segregated.
speci cally, they express the idea that there cannot be segregation unless there are at least two schools with different income distributions. recall that for any district x,r is the district that is obtained from xby reallocating its pupils so that all schools keep their original enrollment, and share the same relative income distribution. the rst axiom requires that if pupils are reallocated so that all schools have the same income distributions, segregation does not increase.
equal allocation property for any district x,x followsorcurlyr.
eap is a very weak axiom. it restricts followsorcurlyonly when comparing a district to its completely integrated version. it says nothing about districts with different allocations of pupils across income groups, or with different number of schools. also, it seems a very natural requirement for any segregation measure to satisfy. indeed, one would expect a reallocation of pupils that is independent of their income not to result in an increased level of segregation.
the next axiom identi es a class of districts all of whose members exhibit the same level of segregation.
equivalence of single school districts i fxandyare single school districts, then x y.
the next axiom refers to the class of districts that have an egalitarian income distribution. a district x c1,..., ck is said to have an egalitarian income distribution if all pupils have the same income, namely, if ck angbracketleft angbracketrightfork 1,...k. the axiom says that all such districts are equally segregated, and more segregated than any other simple district.
equivalence of uniform distribution districts l e t xandybe two simple districts with the same number of pupils and the same income. assume further that xhas an egalitarian income distribution. then, y xif and only if yalso has an egalitarian income distribution.
an immediate consequence of these two axioms is that the egalitarian districts and the single school districts are all equally segregated.
next, we list two axioms that require invariance to certain changes in units of measurement. the rst one states that changes in population that leave the relative attendances of the schools unchanged do not affect segregation.
population homogeneity for any district xand scalar 0,x x.
the next axiom states that changes in household incomes that keep the students relative incomes unchanged do not affect segregation.
income homogeneity for any district xand scalar 0,x x .
it can be easily checked that ssi satis es this and the previous axioms.
the next two axioms require segregation comparisons to be independent of irrelevant subdistricts. in order to motivate the rst one, consider a school district partitioned into two subdistricts. suppose that a reorganization within each subdistrict reduces segregation in every one of them. though not unimaginable, it is reasonable to expect that such a reorganization does not result in a higher districtwide segregation. otherwise we would be witnessing a rather perverse outcome of an otherwise well intended policy. the next axiom requires that no such outcomes can ever occur.
independence for any two districts x,ywith the same population and the same total income, and for any arbitrary district z,x followsorcurlyy x unionmultiz followsorcurlyy unionmultiz.
 14682354, 2020, 4, downloaded from https onlinelibrary.wiley.com doi 10.1111 iere.12466 by tu delft, wiley online library on 29 01 2024 . see the terms and conditions on wiley online library for rules of use oa articles are governed by the applicable creative commons license 1486 lasso de la vega and volij independence guarantees that any policy that reduces segregation in one subdistrict does not result in a higher districtwide segregation. versions of this axiom appear in several contexts. for instance, hutchens and frankel and volij use variations of this axiom in their characterizations of ethnic segregation measures. shorrocks and foster and shorrocks subgroup consistency axioms are essentially the independence axiom in the context of income inequality and poverty measurement, respectively.
thessi satis es ind. to see that this, let x,y, and zbe three districts as described in the axiom. denoting nx ny nand x y , and taking into account that nx unionmultiz ny unionmultiz and x unionmultiz y unionmultiz, we have ssi ssi summationdisplay c x unionmultiznc nx unionmultizln parenleftbigg x unionmultiz  c parenrightbigg  summationdisplay c prime y unionmultiznc prime ny unionmultizln parenleftbigg y unionmultiz  c prime parenrightbigg  summationdisplay c xnc nx unionmultizln parenleftbigg x unionmultiz  c parenrightbigg  summationdisplay c prime ync prime ny unionmultizln parenleftbigg y unionmultiz  c prime parenrightbigg  summationdisplay c xnc nln parenleftbigg x unionmultiz    c parenrightbigg  summationdisplay c prime ync prime nln parenleftbigg y unionmultiz    c prime parenrightbigg  ln parenleftbigg x unionmultiz  parenrightbigg  summationdisplay c xnc nln parenleftbigg   c parenrightbigg  ln parenleftbigg y unionmultiz  parenrightbigg  summationdisplay c prime ync prime nln parenleftbigg   c prime parenrightbigg  summationdisplay c xnc nln parenleftbigg   c parenrightbigg  summationdisplay c prime ync prime nln parenleftbigg   c prime parenrightbigg  ssi ssi.
though similar, the next axiom is different from independence. consider a district composed of two subdistricts x unionmultiyand assume that a policy is applied to y, thereby transforming it into z. further assume that this policy left attendance unchanged. the axiom states that whether or not this policy increases districtwide segregation does not depend on the segregation within subdistrict x.
separability for any three districts x,y,zsuch that ny nz, x unionmultiy followsorcurlyx unionmultiz r unionmultiy followsorcurlyr unionmultiz.
this is a weak axiom, at least to the extent that any segregation index induced by an inequality index, in particular ssi, satis es separability. to see this, consider three districts as described in the axiom, and let us denote n nx ny nx nz. then, i i i summationdisplay c x unionmultiync ni i summationdisplay c x unionmultiznc ni  i summationdisplay c ync ni i summationdisplay c znc ni  i unionmultiy summationdisplay c r unionmultiync ni i unionmultiz summationdisplay c r unionmultiznc ni  i unionmultiy i unionmultiz .
the last axiom requires that similar districts have similar levels of segregation. it will allow us to nd a continuous representation of an order that satis es the previous axioms.
 14682354, 2020, 4, downloaded from https onlinelibrary.wiley.com doi 10.1111 iere.12466 by tu delft, wiley online library on 29 01 2024 . see the terms and conditions on wiley online library for rules of use oa articles are governed by the applicable creative commons license the measurement of income segregation 1487 continuity l e t x c1,..., ck be a district and let xn cn 1,..., cn k ,f o r n  1,2,... be a sequence of districts such that cn k ckfork 1,..., k. for any district y,i f xn followsorcurlyyfor all n, then x followsorcurlyy, and if y followsorcurlyxnfor all n, then y followsorcurlyx.
all of the indices mentioned above satisfy this axiom.
5.an ordinal characterization of ssi we now state our main result.
theorem 1.let followsorcurlybe a segregation order on d. it satis es the equal allocation property, equivalence of single school districts, equivalence of uniform distribution districts, independence, separability, population homogeneity, income homogeneity, and continuity if and only if it is represented by the school separation index. namely, x followsorcurlyy ssi ssifor all districts x ,y.
proof. as was shown earlier, the order represented by ssi satis es all the axioms listed in theorem 1. we now show that the only order that satis es this list is ssi.l e t followsorcurlybe an order that satis es all the axioms listed in theorem 1. the proof consists of four steps. first, we build an index sthat represents followsorcurly. second, we prove that ssatis es a very strong separability property. third, we show that when restricted to the family of simple districts, ssatis es several properties and, as a result, it has a particular form. finally, we show that the only extension of this restricted index to the class of all districts, if is to satisfy all the axioms, and in particular the separability property uncovered in the second step, is ssi.
the following piece of notation will be useful. for any school c angbracketleft,..., angbracketright, letd angbracketleft angbracketright g gdenote the simple district that results from placing each income group in cinto its own school. also, for a district x c1,..., ck ,l e t d unionmulti c xd, namely, the district that results from applying the operation dto each school in x.
let followsorcurlybe a segregation order on dthat satis es all the forgoing axioms. the next claim shows that merging schools with the same distribution of income does not affect segregation.
claim 1.for any district x and for any , 0with 0, x unionmulti x x.
proof. letx c1,..., ck be a district and let , 0w i t h 0.
 x unionmulti x c1,..., ck unionmulti c1,..., ck by de nition  c1,..., ck unionmulti c1,..., ck by ssd and ind  unionmultik i 1 ci, ci .
by udd we have that ci, ci ci fori 1,...k. therefore, by ind and ssd  unionmultik i 1 ci, ci unionmultik i 1 ci   unionmultik i 1 ci x.
 square as a corollary we obtain that districts whose schools have the same income distribution are as segregated as single school districts. as a result of eap then, these districts exhibit the minimum level of segregation.
corollary 1.for any x and for any single school district c , we have that r c .
 14682354, 2020, 4, downloaded from https onlinelibrary.wiley.com doi 10.1111 iere.12466 by tu delft, wiley online library on 29 01 2024 . see the terms and conditions on wiley online library for rules of use oa articles are governed by the applicable creative commons license 1488 lasso de la vega and volij proof. note that r 1 c unionmulti unionmulti k c , where k nck nx. by claim 1 and by ssd r 1 c unionmulti unionmulti k c braceleftbig c bracerightbig  c .
 square we now start building the index. let d1denote the class of districts xwith nx x 1.
also let x0 angbracketleft angbracketright be the district with a single school, which has a single student with income 1. note that by corollary 1 and eap , x followsorcurlyx0for all districts x.
lemma 1.let x prime d1be a district such that x prime followsx0.i f0 1, then x prime unionmultix0 follows x prime unionmultix0.
proof. by ph, x prime followsx0.b yi n d ,  x prime unionmultix prime unionmultix0 follows x prime unionmultix0 unionmultix0.
by claim 1 and ind, x prime unionmultix0 follows x prime unionmultix0. square lemma 2.let x primebe a district in d1such that x prime followsx0. for any district x such that x prime followsorcurlyx, there is a unique prime 0,1 such that x primex prime unionmultix0.
proof. the sets 0,1 x prime unionmultix0 followsorcurlyx and 0,1 x followsorcurly x prime unionmultix0  are closed by cont. since x prime followsorcurlyx followsorcurlyx0, they are not empty. since followsorcurlyis complete, their union is 0,1 . therefore, since the unit interval is connected, the intersection of the two sets is not empty. by lemma 1, this intersection must contain a single element. this single element is the  primewe are looking for. square lemma 3.let x primeand x prime primebe two districts in d1such that x prime prime followsorcurlyx prime followsx0. let x be a district such that x prime followsorcurlyx, and let primeand prime primebe the unique numbers identi ed in lemma 2 de ned, respectively, by x primex prime unionmultix0and x prime primex prime prime unionmultix0.l e t be the unique number identi ed in lemma 2 such that x prime x prime prime unionmultix0. then, prime prime prime .
proof. by de nition of primeand ind, x primex0 unionmultix0. therefore, by claim 1, x prime x prime prime unionmultix0. square we can now proceed to the de nition of a segregation index. fix the following district  x1 2 angbracketleft angbracketright, angbracketleft angbracketright d1.l e t xbe a district, and let x prime d1be a district that satis es x prime followsorcurlyxand x prime followsorcurlyx1 2.l e t primeand primebe the unique numbers identi ed in lemma 2 that satisfy x primex prime unionmultix0and x1 2 primex prime unionmultix0. note that by udd, x1 2 follows x0, and as a result, prime 0. we can thus assign to every district xthe number prime prime. it turns out that this number does not depend on the choice of x prime. indeed, let x prime prime d1be another district such that x prime prime followsorcurlyxand x prime prime followsorcurlyx1 2and let prime primeand prime primebe de ned by x prime primex prime prime unionmultix0and x1 2 prime primex prime prime unionmultix0. assume without loss of generality that x prime prime followsorcurlyx prime.l e t  be de ned by x prime x prime prime unionmultix0. by lemma 3, prime prime prime and prime prime prime . therefore, prime prime   prime prime prime prime. the above discussion allows us to de ne the segregation index sbys prime prime, where prime primeis the ratio built above.
lemma 4.the index srepresents the segregation order followsorcurly.
proof. letxand x primebe two districts and assume that x prime followsx.l e t x prime prime d1be a district such that x prime prime followsorcurlyx primeandx prime prime followsorcurlyx1 2.l e t and primebe de ned by x x prime prime unionmultix0andx prime   primex prime prime unionmultix0. by lemma 1, prime , which implies that s s. square  14682354, 2020, 4, downloaded from https onlinelibrary.wiley.com doi 10.1111 iere.12466 by tu delft, wiley online library on 29 01 2024 . see the terms and conditions on wiley online library for rules of use oa articles are governed by the applicable creative commons license the measurement of income segregation 1489 the following property follows from the way the index was constructed and by ssd. the proof is left to the reader.
claim 2.for any district x, s 0. furthermore, if x is a single school district, then s 0.
we now start the second part of the proof. the next proposition shows that the index ssatis es a very strong separability property.
proposition 1.let x and x primebe two districts. then, s nx nx unionmultix primes s unionmultix prime .
proof. letxand x primebe two districts with populations nx nand nx prime m, respectively.
by ph, we can assume without loss of generality that n m 1. since followsorcurlysatis es ih, we can also assume without loss of generality that x unionmultix prime 1. let x prime primebe a district in d1such that x prime prime followsorcurlyx,x prime prime followsorcurlyx unionmultix primeandx prime prime followsorcurlyx1 2, and let , and be such that x x prime prime unionmultix0,  r unionmultix prime x prime prime unionmultix0,  x unionmultix prime x prime prime unionmultix0.  then, s ,s unionmultix prime , and s for some 0. in order to prove the result it is enough to show that n .
denote x  0 angbracketleft angbracketright . this district has the same population and income as xand it is obtained from x0by multiplying its population by nand the income of each pupil by x n.
also denote x nx prime prime . this district has the same population and income as x.i ti s obtained from x prime primeby multiplying its population by nand by multiplying the income of each pupil by x n. it follows from 1, using ph and ih, that x x unionmultix  0.  choose k nsuch that k n . by concatenating x0to both sides of equation , we obtain r unionmultiy bracehtipdownleft bracehtipupright bracehtipupleft bracehtipdownright x prime unionmultix0 x prime prime unionmultix0 by ind and claim 1   nx unionmultik  nx  0by ih   nx unionmultik  nr by corollary 1 and ind  r unionmultiz bracehtipdownleft bracehtipupright bracehtipupleft bracehtipdownright   nx unionmulti   k  n 1  bracehtipupleft bracehtipdownright bracehtipdownleft bracehtipupright  0   r by claim 1.
 14682354, 2020, 4, downloaded from https onlinelibrary.wiley.com doi 10.1111 iere.12466 by tu delft, wiley online library on 29 01 2024 . see the terms and conditions on wiley online library for rules of use oa articles are governed by the applicable creative commons license 1490 lasso de la vega and volij note that since k n subdistrict zis well de ned. since ny nz m , by sep , x unionmultiy bracehtipdownleft bracehtipupright bracehtipupleft bracehtipdownright x prime unionmultix0 x unionmultiz bracehtipdownleft bracehtipupright bracehtipupleft bracehtipdownright   nx unionmultir.
by equations , , and ind,  x prime prime unionmultix0 unionmultix0 x unionmultix  0 unionmulti  nx unionmulti parenleftbiggk  n 1 parenrightbigg r  x unionmultix  0 unionmulti  nx unionmulti parenleftbiggk  n 1 parenrightbigg x  0  n x prime prime unionmultinx0 unionmulti x prime prime unionmultix0, where the second line follows from ind and corollary 1, and the last one from ih. applying claim 1 to both sides, we obtain  x prime prime unionmultix0 x prime prime unionmultix0.
by ph and lemma 2, we conclude that n . square corollary 2.let x 1,..., xjbe j districts. then, s parenleftbig  unionmultij j 1xj parenrightbig  j summationdisplay j 1nxj nxs s parenleftbig  unionmultij j 1r parenrightbig .  proof. see the appendix. square corollary 3.for any district x c1,..., ck , s s k summationdisplay k 1nck nxs .
proof. by corollary 2, s s summationtextk k 1nd nxs . also, by corollary 1, ck r for k 1,..., k. since these two districts have the same attendance and total income, by ind, x unionmultik k 1 ck unionmultik k 1r , which implies that s  s . noting that nck nd, and d unionmultik k 1d, rearranging yields the desired result. square we now start the third part of the proof. we will show that, restricted to the class of simple districts shas a very particular form. let ibe the inequality index de ned by i s .
corollary 3 says that sis the segregation index induced by ijust de ned. we now show that iis a monotone transformation of a member of the generalized entropy family de ned in example 1. the proof is based on theorem 5 in shorrocks . in order to apply it, we will show that the inequality index i satis es the following properties.
anonymity i,..., i,y ,..., ,y for all permutations g g.the reason is that angbracketleft,..., angbracketright angbracketleft ,y ,..., ,y angbracketright.
 14682354, 2020, 4, downloaded from https onlinelibrary.wiley.com doi 10.1111 iere.12466 by tu delft, wiley online library on 29 01 2024 . see the terms and conditions on wiley online library for rules of use oa articles are governed by the applicable creative commons license the measurement of income segregation 1491 normalization for any school c ,we have that i 0.indeed, i s 0, where the last equality follows from claim 2.
replication invariance for any c ,we have that i i.to see this, note that by ph and claim 1, s s s unionmultid s .
homogeneity for any 0and any c ,i i. indeed, by ih, s  s s .
aggregativity there is a continuous aggregator a r rfor some subset r r6  such that for all schools c ,c prime i a,nc, c,i,nc prime, c prime .  furthermore this aggregator is increasing in its rst and fourth arguments . indeed, consider the function a r rde ned by a s for some districts x,ysuch that s x,nx n, x , ands y,ny m, y . this function is well de ned. indeed, if we let zand wbe two districts such that ,nw, w  ,nx, x and ,nz, z ,ny, y , by ind applied twice, s s s. to see that the aggregator ais increasing in its rst argument note that by ind, s s whenever s s and  . a similar argument shows that ais increasing in its fourth argument.
to see that equation holds, note that i s s unionmultid and that by de nition of the aggregator a s unionmultid a ,nc, c,s ,nc prime, c prime a,nc, c,i,nc prime, c prime .
the next proposition show that isatis es the pigou dalton principle of transfers. namely, if school cis obtained from school c primeby means of a progressive transfer, then i i.
formally, proposition 2. for any two schools c angbracketleft, angbracketrightand c prime angbracketleft, angbracketrightsuch that 0 y1 y2and delta1 , we have that i i.
proof. letb1 n2 delta1  delta1 n1n2and b2 n1 delta1  delta1 n1n2, and consider the following subdivision of school c1 angbracketleft angbracketrightinto c11 angbracketleftn1,y1 delta1 n1 angbracketrightandc12 angbracketleftbig  angbracketrightbig since n1 nc11 nc12and c1 c11 c12 , this subdivision is feasible. by udd and claim 2 we have that s s. similarly, if we subdivide school c2 angbracketleft angbracketrightinto the following two schools  c21 angbracketleft angbracketright,c22 angbracketleftbig n2,y2 delta1 n2 angbracketrightbig we obtain that s s. therefore, by ind s s s  s.  by udd, s s angbracketright and s s angbracketright .
since nc11 nc21 n1andnc12 nc22 n2,b yi n d , s s parenleftbig braceleftbig  angbracketleft angbracketright bracerightbig  unionmulti braceleftbig  angbracketleft angbracketright bracerightbig parenrightbig  s .   14682354, 2020, 4, downloaded from https onlinelibrary.wiley.com doi 10.1111 iere.12466 by tu delft, wiley online library on 29 01 2024 . see the terms and conditions on wiley online library for rules of use oa articles are governed by the applicable creative commons license 1492 lasso de la vega and volij from inequalities and , we obtain that i s s i which is what we wanted to show. square finally, the next proposition uses the fact that isatis es the pigou dalton principle to show that it is continuous.
proposition 3.for all c angbracketleft,..., angbracketright, the value i depends continuously on its arguments .
proof 1. let c angbracketleft,..., angbracketrightbe a school and let ck angbracketleft,..., angbracketright, fork 1,2,...be a sequence of schools that converges to c. we need to show that i  i. we can assume without loss of generality that c ck 1 and nc nck 1, for k  1,2,.... indeed, since followsorcurlysatis es ih we can de ne c, and ckto be the schools that are obtained from candck, respectively by normalizing both their attendance and income to be one as follows c c and ck ck . since ck cwe have that ck   c. by ph and by ih, i i and i i for all k.
letn min n1,..., ng and y min y1,..., yg .l e t and let k0be such that for all k k0, ck c . consider school c angbracketleft, angbracketright, where np 1 ,yp y , and is chosen so that nc c 1. school c is a school with two income groups, the poor being poorer than every student both in cand in ck, and the rich being richer than the rich both in candck, for every k k0. also, the number of rich in c is smaller than the number of members in every income group both in candck.
by construction, the income distribution of c is lorenz dominated by that of ckfor all k  k0. that is, the lorenz curve associated with c is nowhere above the one associated with ck.
therefore, there is a sequence of schools c0,c1,..., cnwith c0 c andcn cksuch that ct 1 is obtained from ctby means of a progressive transfer. therefore, by proposition 2, i  i. as a result, d followsd for all k k0. furthermore, since ckconverges to c,b yc o n t d followsorcurlyd.
let now x prime d1such that x prime followsorcurlyx1 2and x prime followsorcurlyd. by lemma 2 there are unique  , k, 0,1 such that d x prime unionmultix0,  d kx prime unionmultix0 k k0,  x1 2 x prime unionmultix0.  we end the proof by showing that kconverges to . since i k and i  this will imply that i converges to i, which is what we want to show. the argument is standard. since k 0,1 for k k0, the sequence k k k0has a convergent subsequence.
we now argue that all its convergent subsequences converge to . assume by contradiction that there is a subsequence kthat converges to . let hatwide  2. since hatwide by lemma 1 and equation   hatwide x prime x0 follows x prime x0 d.   14682354, 2020, 4, downloaded from https onlinelibrary.wiley.com doi 10.1111 iere.12466 by tu delft, wiley online library on 29 01 2024 . see the terms and conditions on wiley online library for rules of use oa articles are governed by the applicable creative commons license the measurement of income segregation 1493 since kconverges to hatwide , there is an lscript0such that for all lscript lscript 0, k hatwide . therefore, by equation and lemma 1, for all lscript lscript 0, d kx prime unionmulti x0 follows hatwide x prime unionmultix0.
since ckconverges to c, by cont we have that d followsorcurly hatwide x prime unionmultix0, which contradicts . square since isatis es the above properties on c, they are also satis ed on the subclass of schools cz, where the population ngof each of its groups is an integer. it now follows from theorem 5 in shorrocks that there exists a parameter inrand an increasing, continuous function f r r satisfying f 0 such that for any school cincz, i f i ,  where i is the generalized entropy inequality index with parameter .
we now show that equation also holds for all schools cwhere the number of pupils in each school is a rational number. to see this, note that when the number of pupils in each group of school cis rational, kc czfor some positive integer k. by replication invariance, i i, which, by combining all the groups with the same income into one group, can be written as i. then, using equation we have that i i  f i f i , where the last equality follows from the fact that i also satis es replication invariance. finally, equation also holds for all schools c csince f i is continuous and qis dense in r.
we now start the last step of the proof. we show that sis a positive multiple of the ssi.
given that equation holds for all schools c c, applying corollary 3, we obtain that the segregation index is of the form s f i summationdisplay c xnc nxf ,  that is, sis the segregation index induced by f. since the ssi is the segregation index induced by i0, it is enough to show that fis linear and that 0.
in order to show that fis linear we will make use of the following well known decomposability property of the generalized entropy indices i . see, for instance, equation in shorrocks .
observation 1.for any two schools c 1and c 2,l e tc c1 c2. then i nc1 nc parenleftbigg c1  c parenrightbigg  i nc2 nc parenleftbigg c2  c parenrightbigg  i i .
the proof of this observation follows from a routine manipulation of the formula of i and is left to the reader.
we now show that fmust be both concave and convex. let z,z primebe in the range of i  , and . assume without loss of generality that z  z prime. pick two simple districts, x c1,..., ck andy c prime 1,..., c prime k prime , each with unit population and unit income, such that i zand i z prime. since xandyare simple districts, we have that i 0 for all c xand for all c prime y. therefore, since fis increasing, s  f f f f s. since s 0,xhas at least two schools.
pick one school, say c1, and transfer a proportion pof pupils from each of the other schools to  14682354, 2020, 4, downloaded from https onlinelibrary.wiley.com doi 10.1111 iere.12466 by tu delft, wiley online library on 29 01 2024 . see the terms and conditions on wiley online library for rules of use oa articles are governed by the applicable creative commons license 1494 lasso de la vega and volij school c1to obtain district x c1 p,c2, cn . denoting c1 c1 p we have by equation  s f f   f f .
note that when p 0,s s f f s, and when p 1, s f f 0. consequently, by the intermediate value theorem, there is a p such that s s. let z x and note that nz nx 1 ny, z x y 1 and i i z. then, given that yis a simple district, sy fy summationdisplay c z ncf   f i summationdisplay c z ncf ,  where the second equality made use of observation 1 and the fact that z y.o nt h e other hand, since by ph, s s, by ind, sy sy   s  s s  s s, where the second equality follows from claim 1 and the fourth one from ind. using equation , and taking into account that yis a simple district, sy bracketleftbigg f summationdisplay c zncf bracketrightbigg  f   f f summationdisplay c z ncf .  comparing equations and , and taking into account that i i , we conclude that f f f i . recalling that i z andi z primewe conclude that fis both concave and convex. furthermore, since f 0, we have that f azfor some a 0.
it remains to show that 0. we will show that unless this is the case, there exist two schools, c1andc2such that s 0, which contradicts claim 2.
let negationslash 0. let n1 n2 1, let 1 0 be such that  1 , and let 2be implicitly de ned by n1 1 n2 2 1. also let c1 angbracketleft,, 1  angbracketrightand c2 angbracketleft angbracketrightbe two schools where 0 p 1 and 0 1. school c1has two income groups. the proportion of pupils in the lower income group is p. the total population is 1 and the mean income is 1.
it can be checked that the closer pis to 1 and to 0, the higher is the income inequality as measured by i , both because the proportion of low income pupils becomes large and their  14682354, 2020, 4, downloaded from https onlinelibrary.wiley.com doi 10.1111 iere.12466 by tu delft, wiley online library on 29 01 2024 . see the terms and conditions on wiley online library for rules of use oa articles are governed by the applicable creative commons license the measurement of income segregation 1495 incomes become low. for the moment assume that pis chosen to be close enough to 1 and  is chosen to be close enough to 0 so that i i  1 2.  we will later show that this can be done. now let x c1,c2 . then, using equation and the fact that f az, we have that s a parenleftbigg i 2 summationdisplay s 1i  2 parenrightbigg .
by observation 1 and since i 0, s a parenleftbigg i 1 2  1i 1 2  2i 1 2i 1 2i parenrightbigg  a parenleftbigg i 1 2  1i 1 2i parenrightbigg  a parenleftbigg i 1 2i parenrightbigg  0, where the last inequality follows from inequality . as mentioned before, this inequality contradicts claim 2.
it remains to show that p 1 and 0 can be chosen so that inequality holds. to see this, note rst that since nc1 1 and c1 1, we have that i is independent of p and of . also, by direct computation, we have that i     p 1 1  if negationslash 1 p log l o g parenleftbig 1 p  1 p parenrightbig if 1..
case 1 1. in this case we have that lim p 1i and therefore, inequality  can be satis ed.
case 2 0. in this case we have that lim p 1i 1  and therefore for close enough to 0, inequality holds.
case 3 . in this case we have that lim p 1  0i 1  , and noting that    1 we have that 1  parenleftbig 1  1 parenrightbig  parenleftbig 1  2 parenrightbig  parenleftbig 1  1 parenrightbig1  i  1 2 parenleftbig 1  1 parenrightbig.
therefore, for pclose enough to 1 and close enough to 0, inequality holds.
this completes the proof of the theorem.
 square  14682354, 2020, 4, downloaded from https onlinelibrary.wiley.com doi 10.1111 iere.12466 by tu delft, wiley online library on 29 01 2024 . see the terms and conditions on wiley online library for rules of use oa articles are governed by the applicable creative commons license 1496 lasso de la vega and volij table 1 independence of the axioms ph ih eap ssd udd ind sep cont ssi  nssi  v   ssi  w  n  f  cv  5.1. discussion.
independence of the axioms . table 1 lists a number of segregation indices that satisfy all the axioms but one. apart from the segregation indices introduced in section 3, the table includes the following indices   nssi nxssi  w summationtext c xnc nxi0  n 1 summationtext c x2  f radicalbig i0 summationtext c xnc nx radicalbig i0  cv  v  xit can be seen that ssi satis es all the axioms introduced in section 4 and that if we do not require either ph, ih, the single school property, equivalence of single school districts, independence, or separability, then a segregation index can be found that satis es all the remaining axioms. we have not been able to show that continuity is not implied by the other axioms. our main results states that ssi index is essentially the only segregation index that satis es all of them.
strength of the axioms . our axioms impose restrictions on segregation indices. nevertheless, restricted to the class of simple districts , any segregation index snaturally induces an income inequality index. theorem 1 implies that our axioms characterize a segregation index whose induced index of income inequality is theil s second measure. one may wonder whether our axioms restricted to the class of simple districts are strong enough to characterize directly theil s second measure or any other income inequality index. the answer is negative. indeed, eap , ssd, and sep are axioms that are toothless when applied to indices de ned on the class of simple districts since they deal with comparisons between districts that are not in that class. the axioms that have any bite on the subclass of simple districts are udd, ph, ih, ind, and cont, which are not suf cient to imply the well known additive separability of i0, and not even the pigou dalton principle.
our characterization is ordinal . speci cally, we characterize the segregation order represented by the ssi instead of the index itself. therefore, any increasing transformation of the ssi yields an ordinally equivalent index. in particular, if one is interested in an index that satis es all our axioms and that is also bounded between 0 and 1, one can apply the transformation f x .
additive separability of the index . given a partition of a district into two subdistricts, the within district segregation is the population weighted average of the segregation of the districts. the between district segregation, on the other hand, is the segregation that would result if the segregation within each of the subdistricts were to be eliminated.
corollary 2 shows that among the equivalent representations of the order characterized in theorem 1 the positive multiples of ssi satisfy a very useful additive separability  14682354, 2020, 4, downloaded from https onlinelibrary.wiley.com doi 10.1111 iere.12466 by tu delft, wiley online library on 29 01 2024 . see the terms and conditions on wiley online library for rules of use oa articles are governed by the applicable creative commons license the measurement of income segregation 1497 table 2 segregation in selected chilean regions for 2013 ssi v segregation breakdown segregation breakdown total between within inequal. pure total between within inequal. pure region 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 biob o 0.259 0.023 0.236 0.441 0.587 0.177 0.007 0.170 0.278 0.635 valpara so 0.236 0.016 0.220 0.402 0.586 0.211 0.007 0.204 0.332 0.637 santiago 0.390 0.024 0.365 0.560 0.696 0.736 0.022 0.714 0.971 0.758 notes columns 2 and 3 show its decomposition into segregation between and within provinces for the ssi.
columns 7 and 8 show the same decomposition for v. columns 4 and 5 show the decomposition into income inequality and pure segregation induced by ssi. columns 9 and 10 show this decomposition for v. for the calculation of the variance we measured income in millions of 2013 chilean pesos.
property. namely, the index is the sum of the between district and within district segregation. it can be checked that this property is also satis ed by v. the next section illustrates this separability property using data from chile.
6.an empirical illustration in this section, we illustrate the decomposability property of the ssi andvmentioned above. we use data from simce , which contains student data from virtually all schools in chile. chile has 54 provinces, grouped into 15 regions. for our analysis, we restrict attention to all provinces of the regions of santiago, valpara so, and biob o . these three regions represent a 60 of the chilean population. data include for each student, the school he attends and the income bracket his parents belong to. income levels, which we measure in millions of chilean pesos are partitioned into 15 income brackets.8 for each province, we estimate the mean income in each bracket by assuming that income is distributed according to a log normal distribution, as follows. for an initial guess  of the mean incomes, we t a log normal distribution assuming that all households in income bracket ihave an income of yi,f o r i 1,..., 15. then, we calculate the mean incomes of each bracket induced by the estimated distribution, and repeat the process using the estimated mean incomes as a new guess until the process converges. chilean schools are classi ed according to their degree of dependence on public funding into three categories public, semipublic, and private.9 table 2 shows for the regions of santiago, biob o, and valpara so, their income segregation as measured both by the ssi andv, and its decomposition into segregation between provinces and segregation within them . as can be seen, the metropolitan region of santiago exhibits more segregation than the other two, both according to the ssi andv. however, these two indices do not order the regions identically. also, for all the three regions, more than 90 of the segregation can be attributed to the segregation within provinces, re ecting the fact that for each region the mean incomes of its provinces are roughly the same. recall that any segregation index that is induced by an inequality index can be factored into a pure segregation and an inequality indices. columns 8one chilean peso was equivalent to around us 500 in 2013.
9public schools are funded by the city, and the semipublic category consist of private schools that are subsidized by public funds.
 14682354, 2020, 4, downloaded from https onlinelibrary.wiley.com doi 10.1111 iere.12466 by tu delft, wiley online library on 29 01 2024 . see the terms and conditions on wiley online library for rules of use oa articles are governed by the applicable creative commons license 1498 lasso de la vega and volij table 3 segregation in selected chilean provinces for 2013 ssi v segregation breakdown segregation breakdown total between within inequal. pure total between within inequal. pure province 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 arauco 0.123 0.054 0.070 0.310 0.398 0.032 0.021 0.010 0.082 0.386 biob o 0.223 0.143 0.080 0.411 0.542 0.136 0.102 0.034 0.226 0.604 concepcion 0.269 0.189 0.080 0.443 0.607 0.253 0.194 0.059 0.380 0.666  uble 0.233 0.123 0.110 0.424 0.551 0.100 0.043 0.056 0.186 0.537 chacabuco 0.617 0.555 0.062 0.805 0.766 1.812 1.769 0.043 2.086 0.869 cordillera 0.147 0.066 0.081 0.298 0.493 0.106 0.057 0.048 0.249 0.425 maipo 0.275 0.190 0.085 0.441 0.623 0.287 0.228 0.059 0.420 0.683 melipilla 0.207 0.171 0.036 0.380 0.544 0.147 0.122 0.025 0.236 0.625 santiago 0.402 0.300 0.101 0.573 0.701 0.828 0.711 0.118 1.096 0.756 talagante 0.248 0.160 0.088 0.419 0.593 0.247 0.185 0.062 0.378 0.652 los andes 0.213 0.160 0.052 0.393 0.542 0.190 0.149 0.041 0.353 0.539 marga marga 0.170 0.104 0.065 0.351 0.484 0.121 0.086 0.035 0.262 0.463 petorca 0.074 0.038 0.037 0.256 0.290 0.021 0.009 0.012 0.095 0.217 quillota 0.189 0.139 0.050 0.361 0.523 0.136 0.104 0.032 0.245 0.555 s. antonio 0.113 0.048 0.065 0.285 0.396 0.050 0.024 0.026 0.141 0.351 san felipe 0.180 0.137 0.042 0.346 0.520 0.130 0.101 0.029 0.217 0.598 valparaiso 0.311 0.252 0.059 0.462 0.673 0.350 0.294 0.056 0.479 0.731 notes columns 2 and 3 show its decomposition into segregation between and within school categories for the ssi.
columns 7 and 8 show the same decomposition for v. columns 4 and 5 show the decomposition into income inequality and pure segregation induced by ssi. columns 9 and 10 show this decomposition for v. for the calculation of the variance we measured income in millions of 2013 chilean pesos.
4 and 5 report the result of this factorization for each of the regions for the case of the ssi, and columns 9 and 10 report it for v.10as can be seen, the tiny difference in the segregation exhibited by the regions of biob o and valpara so is mainly due to a difference in their income inequality instead of a difference in their pure segregation.
the fact that most of the regions segregation is attributed to the segregation within their provinces suggests an analysis of this component. table 3 reports for each of the provinces of the above three regions, their income segregation in 2013 as measured both by the ssi andv, and its decomposition into between and within school categories.11 though similar, the ordering of the provinces according to the two indices are not identical. we can see that in most provinces, a large proportion of income segregation both according to ssi andv, is due to the segregation between categories. this indicates that the mean incomes of the public, semipublic, and private schools are substantially different from each other. the mean incomes of the schools within each category, on the other hand, are similar to each other as evidenced by the small segregation within categories exhibited by most provinces.
10since the pure segregation associated with vis the square of jargowsky s nsi , column 10 corresponds to this index.
11as mentioned above, schools are classi ed into public, semipublic, and private.
 14682354, 2020, 4, downloaded from https onlinelibrary.wiley.com doi 10.1111 iere.12466 by tu delft, wiley online library on 29 01 2024 . see the terms and conditions on wiley online library for rules of use oa articles are governed by the applicable creative commons license the measurement of income segregation 1499 appendix proof of corollary 2. applying proposition 1 to the district x1 unionmultir, we obtain the statement for j 2. therefore, for any m 1, s parenleftbigg m  unionmulti j 1xj parenrightbigg  s parenleftbigg r parenleftbigg m 1  unionmulti j 1xj parenrightbigg  unionmultir parenrightbigg  m 1 summationtext j 1nxj ns parenleftbigg m 1  unionmulti j 1xj parenrightbigg  nxm ns.
assume that the statement is also true for j m 1. then, denoting n nx, s parenleftbigg m  unionmulti j 1xj parenrightbigg  s parenleftbigg r parenleftbigg m 1  unionmulti j 1xj parenrightbigg  unionmultir parenrightbigg  m 1 summationtext j 1nxj n   s parenleftbigg m 1  unionmulti j 1r parenrightbigg  m 1 summationdisplay j 1nxj m 1 summationtext j 1nxjs     nxm ns  s parenleftbigg r parenleftbigg m 1  unionmulti j 1xj parenrightbigg  unionmultir parenrightbigg  m 1 summationtext j 1nxj ns parenleftbigg m 1  unionmulti j 1r parenrightbigg  m summationdisplay j 1nxj ns.  applying this expression to unionmultim j 1r, and noting that r r, we obtain that s parenleftbigg m  unionmulti j 1r parenrightbigg  s parenleftbigg r parenleftbigg m 1  unionmulti j 1r parenrightbigg  unionmultir parenrightbigg  m 1 summationtext j 1nxj ns parenleftbigg m 1  unionmulti j 1r parenrightbigg  m summationdisplay j 1nxj ns .
since r r and since by claim 2 s 0, rearranging we obtains unionmultir s m 1 summationtext j 1nxj ns . replacing this expression in equation we get s parenleftbigg m  unionmulti j 1xj parenrightbigg  s parenleftbigg m  unionmulti j 1r parenrightbigg  m summationdisplay j 1nxj ns.
 square references coleman ,j. s.,e. campbell ,c. hobson ,j. mcpartland ,a. mood ,f. weinfeld ,and r. york ,equality of educational opportunity study .
dawkins ,c. j., space and the measurement of income segregation, journal of regional science 47 , 255 72.
echenique ,f.,and r. g. fryer , a measure of segregation based on social interactions, the quarterly journal of economics 122 , 441 85.
fong ,e.,and k. shibuya , the spatial separation of the poor in canadian cities, demography 37 , 449 59.
 14682354, 2020, 4, downloaded from https onlinelibrary.wiley.com doi 10.1111 iere.12466 by tu delft, wiley online library on 29 01 2024 . see the terms and conditions on wiley online library for rules of use oa articles are governed by the applicable creative commons license 1500 lasso de la vega and volij foster ,j. e.,and a. f. shorrocks , subgroup consistent poverty indices, econometrica 59 , 687 709.
frankel ,d. m. ,and o. volij , measuring school segregation, journal of economic theory 146 , 1 38.
hanushek ,e. a. ,j. f. kain ,j. m. markman ,and s. g. rivkin , does peer ability affect student achievement journal of applied econometrics 18 , 527 44.
hutchens ,r., numerical measures of segregation desirable properties and their implications,  mathematical social sciences 42 , 13 29.
 , one measure of segregation, international economic review 45 , 555 78.
imberman ,s. a. ,a. d. kugler ,and b. i. sacerdote , katrina s children evidence on the structure of peer effects from hurricane evacuees, the american economic review 102 , 2048 82.
jahn ,j.,c. f. schmid ,and c. schrag , the measurement of ecological segregation, american sociological review 12 , 293 303.
jargowsky ,p. a . , take the money and run economic segregation in us metropolitan areas, american sociological review 61 , 984 98.
kim,j.,and p . a. jargowsky , the gini coef cient and segregation on a continuous variable, in y.
fl ckiger, s. f. reardon, and j. silber, eds., occupational and residential segregation , 57 70.
lavy ,v.,m. d. paserman ,and a. schlosser , inside the black box of ability peer effects evidence from variation in the proportion of low achievers in the classroom, the economic journal 122 , 208 37.
massey ,d. s. ,a n dn .a .d e n t o n , the dimensions of residential segregation, social forces 67 , 281 315.
mayer ,s. e. , how economic segregation affects children s educational attainment, social forces 81 , 153 76.
reardon ,s. f., measures of ordinal segregation, in y. fl ckiger, s. f. reardon, and j. silber, eds., occupational and residential segregation , 129 55.
 , measures of income segregation, technical report, stanford center for education policy analysis, 2011.
 , and g. firebaugh , measures of multigroup segregation, sociological methodology 32 , 33 67.
shorrocks ,a. f. , the class of additively decomposable inequality measures, econometrica 48 , 613 25.
 , inequality decomposition by population subgroups, econometrica 52 , 1369 85.
 , aggregation issues in inequality measurement, in w. eichhorn , measurement in economics , 429 51.
theil ,h.,economics and information theory .
 14682354, 2020, 4, downloaded from https onlinelibrary.wiley.com doi 10.1111 iere.12466 by tu delft, wiley online library on 29 01 2024 . see the terms and conditions on wiley online library for rules of use oa articles are governed by the applicable creative commons license 