impact of spatial effects on income segregation indicesq sergio j. rey , david c. folch geoda center for geospatial analysis and computation, school of geographical sciences and urban planning, arizona state university, united states article info article history  received 15 february 2010 received in revised form 13 july 2011 accepted 27 july 2011available online 30 august 2011 keywords  segregationspatial effectsabstract residential segregation is an inherently spatial phenomenon as it measures the separation of different types of people within a region. whether measured with an explicitly spatial index, or a classic aspatial index, a region s underlying spatial properties could manifest themselves in the magnitude of measured segregation. in this paper we implement a monte carlo simulation approach to investigate the properties of four segregation indices in regions built with speci c spatial properties. this approach allows us tocontrol the experiment in ways that empirical data do not. in general we con rm the expected results for the indices under various spatial properties, but some unexpected results emerge. both the dissimilarity index and neighborhood sorting index are sensitive to region size, but their spatial counterparts,the adjusted dissimilarity index and generalized neighborhood sorting index, are generally immune to this problem. the paper also lends weight to concerns about the downward pressure on measured segregation when multiple neighborhoods are grouped into a single census tract. finally, we discuss con cerns about the way space is incorporated into segregation indices since the expected value of thespatial indices tested is lower than their aspatial counterparts.
 c2112011 elsevier ltd. all rights reserved.
1. introduction segregation indices have appeared in a vast literature focusing on the equity of urban areas.1a common theme in these studies is to examine the comparative levels of segregation either across cities at one point in time, or with respect to changes in segregation over time . an implicit assumption underlying these studies is that the values from the same index applied to different cities and or points in time are in fact comparable. while comparisons comprise the core of many empirical segregation studies, the measures distributional properties have received far less attention. as such, the extent to which the assumption of index comparability holds, especially in the face of cities with vastly different spatial structures, remains largely unexamined.
all residential segregation measures are in principle spatial.  segregation indices use residents location choices to proxy for unobserved attributes such as social networks high segregation implies low interaction between people of different types within a region. however, the single index number is the result of many spatial decisions made by people far removed from the residentsunder study. in the united states, segregation studies typically use data collected by the us census bureau, which are disseminated via aggregation units , such as census tracts, to protect the privacy of individuals. the researcher must choose the scale of the aggregation units to investigate, e.g. blocks, block groups or census tracts, and this choice often involves an assumption that the sociospatial construct neighborhood matches the of cial aggregationunits chosen. in addition, the researcher must choose the region size, e.g. municipality, county or metropolitan statistical area, as the boundary to which a single index number should apply. beyond the data themselves, segregation measures incorporate a variety of assumptions about spatial interactions. the explicitly spatial segregation measures that have emerged since the early 1980s can account for interactions between residents across census de ned aggregation units, where earlier measures assumed interactions ended at the aggregation unit boundary. the formulation of these spatial measures assumes that regions with greater clustering of similar neighborhoods are more segregated. the user of these spatial measures must choose among indices that incorporate space in different ways. all told, there are many explicit and implicit spatial decisions behind any single index number.
some of these decisions are expected to directly impact measured segregation, while others affect measured segregation more subtle ways.
the extensive literature on the measurement of segregation includes taxonomies of measures, rules de ning what makes an appropriate measure and the proposal of new measures few controlled simulation tests of the measures exist, however. of 0198 9715 see front matter c2112011 elsevier ltd. all rights reserved.
doi 10.1016 j.compenvurbsys.2011.07.008qfunding for this research was supported by national science foundation award bcs 1102553.
 corresponding author.
e mail address sergio.rey asu.edu .
1for overviews see clark , cutler, glaeser, and vigdor , jargowsky , jargowsky and kim , massey and denton , waldorf , wong .computers, environment and urban systems 35 431 441 contents lists available at sciverse sciencedirect computers, environment and urban systems journal homepage www. elsevier.com locat e compenvurbsys the limited examples, some authors explore the measures properties using simulations based on a small number of extreme scenarios others explore them using empirical data from a diverse set of regions . while these approaches provide considerable direction, the rst does not supply suf cient variation to explore the properties fully, and the second likely contains too much unexplained variation to isolate the factors affecting those properties.
this paper identi es areas of concern for researchers by exploring the impact of four spatial effects on the sampling distributions of four income segregation indices. by using a controlled simulation approach, we construct an extensive set of simulations involving 200 region designs, building a sampling distribution for each index for each design, 800 in total. we focus on two aspatial andtwo spatial income segregation indices dissimilarity index , neighborhood sorting index , adjusted dissimilarity index  and generalized neighborhood sorting index .
the spatial effects considered are region size de ned in terms of the number of neighborhoods, variation in region wide interconnectivity through two spatial autocorrelation models, variation in spatial clustering of like neighborhoods via ten values of an autocorrelation parameter, and the effect of drawing aggregation units that do not match the underlying scale of the neighborhood pattern.
the remainder of the paper is organized as follows. we rst provide the broader context for this work by revisiting some of the key methodological debates appearing in the segregation literature.
this is followed by a description of our experimental design and the simulation procedures used to examine the impact of spatial effects on the sampling distributions of the segregation indices.
the results of the experiments are examined in section 4and discussed in section 5. the paper concludes with an overview of the key ndings and the identi cation of directions for future research.
2. motivation the concept of residential segregation is relatively intuitive it measures the spatial separation of groups within a region. but this is where the simplicity ends. measuring segregation, as has been pointed out before , is composed of myriad theoretical and mathematical challenges. the theoretical challenges involve what it means to be segregated. is it a relative measure against some standard, or is it better described in absolute terms are highly segregated areas located near one another even more segregated  from a mathematical perspective the challenges involve how measured segregation changes in the face of changes in the underlying data. can different sized regions be compared if one person is moved between areas, does the index re ect that shift appropriately should the index change if counts change but proportions remain the same  the former challenges relate to choosing among the many candidate indices, while the latter look more into validating a particular index. this paper derives its motivation more from the latter line of literature than former as it explores how explicitly spatial changes in the underlying data affect measured segregation.
from an empirical perspective, the usefulness of segregation indices is often derived from cross sectional or time series comparisons. if we want to say that region a is more segregated than region b, or that region c has become less segregated over the last 20 years, a critical criterion is that our measure and data do not prejudice the results where no region has a lower expected segregation value a priori . an example of this is the common nding that larger regions are more segregated than smallerones . if there are mathematical or data conditions predisposing larger regions to higher segregation, then this nding becomes ambiguous. it may be that larger regions are more segregated, but the methods and data available might lead to this nding regardless of some underlying truth. in their 1955 paper, duncan and duncan stated, the problem of validating segregation indices is viewed as one of some importance, not only in its own right, but also as an illustration of the dif culties in nding an adequate rationale for much sociological research using index numbers . this statement hints at the challenges faced when embarking on an empirical study involving segregation. speci cally, are the inferences made using segregation indices appropriate, valid and relevant  residential segregation operates at two distinct spatial levels  within neighborhoods and between neighborhoods. traditionalsegregation indices ignore the latter level by treating neighborhoods as independent observations and are thus denoted aspatial indices. parallel to developments in exploratory spatial data analysis , segregation researchers have recognized that the spatial con guration of the neighborhoods should be central to the empirical analysis. this re ects the recognition that traditional segregation indices are examples of whole map statistics in the sense that a permutation of the neighborhoods across the map would leave the aggregate segregation value unchanged.
spatially explicit indices have been suggested throughout the social sciences for decades. however, their presence in the residential segregation literature was spotty until massey and denton  took a broad view of the concept and brought the scattered ideas into a uni ed framework. in addition to identifying the existing segregation indices, they borrowed from other literatures to develop new measures.
conceptually, spatial indices attempt to account for the empirical observation that a poor neighborhood surrounded by poor neighborhoods is more segregated than one surrounded by rich neighborhoods. fig. 1 illustrates the concept by asking the question is the region on the right more or less segregated than the one on the left in both cases there 16 areas of one type and 84 of the other. aspatial measures treat both the same spatial ones should identify the region on the right as more segregated.
while neighborhood location is one spatial dimension impacting segregation measurement, another dimension relates to the spatial scale of the neighborhoods, and remains an important challenge facing empirical researchers since it has yet to nd a satisfactory solution in either the literature on methods or in that on data.
johnston shows that holding the population size of each individual area xed will result in higher segregation levels for more populous regions, given some mild assumptions. his argument revolves around the xed tract size of say 4000 people, andthat if all sub groups of the population are not exactly divisible by 4000 then there is necessarily mixing of the subgroups. in smaller regions, if residents try to maximize segregation, the share of mixed to homogeneous neighborhoods would be higher than for large regions. the highly stylized explanation in johnston  is corroborated by krupka which measures segregation for us metropolitan areas using different scales of us census bureau data. he shows decreasing measured segregation as the scale increases from census block groups to counties. wong and wong et al. approach the scale question from the perspective that variations in spatial scale will have less impact on measured segregation when the population is more clustered. a more clustered population is expected to have similar population patterns at various scales, thus having less impact on measured segregation no matter the scale of analysis chosen. wong  compares the scale effect for spatial and aspatial segregation measures for 30 us regions and nds that the spatial measures, like their aspatial counterparts, are sensitive to data at different scales.432 s.j. rey, d.c. folch computers, environment and urban systems 35 431 441one challenge in testing these hypotheses with empirical data is that the underlying social process is unknown, as is the effect of the technical process used by data providers, such as the us census bureau, in the delineation of aggregation units used for data dissemination . the use of simulated regions with known properties is one avenue to overcome the ambiguity that often exists in empirical data however, this approach is the exception rather than the rule in methodological research on segregation . some notable exceptions relate to comparisons of the dissimilarity index to a random distribution. taeuber and taeuber conducts a number of small simulations of augusta, georgia, in order to determine if augusta s observed segregation level is different from a level that could have occurred from a random allocation of black and white households, and if the difference between augusta s and atlanta s segregation levels could have occurred from chance variation. in taking the random distribution idea even further, cortese, falk, and cohen and winship use monte carlo methods to compute expected values for dfor various proportions of the minority population in a city .
in more recent work, zhang implements permutations of empirical data within various us cities to separate out patterns of racial and income segregation, using das the test statistic. wong et al. randomly aggregates census block data to test the effects of scale on measured segregation on 30 us regions. although not focused on segregation, amrhein and reynolds uses a monte carlo approach to aggregate areas from a single region to different spatial scales and nds the gspatial autocorrelation statistic is highly correlated to data aggregated to different scales. possibly the largest use of simulation in the residential segregation literature involves agent based modeling of tipping points, exempli ed in foundational works by schelling and continuing today in contributions such as fossett . although these generally look at causal factors of segregation as opposed to methodological issues of its measurement, stearns and logan uses this framework to identify how different causal theories of segregation in uence measured segregation.
beyond the challenges posed by space, residential income segregation, or the separation of rich and poor, must contend with a number of data issues. typically, income segregation studies implement a discrete classi cation of people into categories such as rich poor, low middle high income or an even greater number of income categories . this is a direct translation of the classic race based segregation indices to the income domain. there aredrawbacks to this approach since income is a continuous variable, and even in the discrete case there is an explicit ordering of income levels unlike races . as a result, certain decisions must be made by the researcher as to the categorization of the data these decisions are largely predetermined in the case of race based segregation measurement. jargowsky and jargowsky and kim directly tackle this issue in their segregation indices by allowing income to be treated more naturally as a continuous variable. as will be seen in the simulation section, we focus on two discrete indices and the two put forward by jargowsky.
whether measuring income, race or another form of residential segregation, researchers are often investigating a diverse set of urban areas. the united states urban system is one example of this diversity. taking the june 2003 us of ce of management and bud get s metropolitan statistical area de nitions, we examine 2000 census data for 359 us urban areas for internal measures of variation and found that in all cases the variation was heavily skewed. a country containing both new york city, ny and carson city, nv is bound to generate variation in measured segregation. in addition to shear size 2new york city was also the densest3and had the most income clustering.4astable 1 and fig. 2 show this is not the whole story. another indicator, standard deviation of per capita income,5shows a similar trend of an extreme outlier, but in this case it is the gulfport, ms region, which contains biloxi and pascagoula among other mississippi cities .
3. simulation procedure this section details the simulation procedure we use to generate regions and areas and formalizes the hypotheses we test on the relationship between urban structure and segregation measurement. in the following discussion, the term region corresponds to urban area and area corresponds to neighborhood. studies fig. 1. illustration of spatial segregation scenarios.
2size is measured in terms of number of census tracts in 2000. this is a good indicator of size in the segregation context since most indices provide a region widevalue based on data at some subregional level.
3we use the median tract population density for each msa. since periphery tracts in many regions have large areas due to the presence ofpublic or undeveloped lands, average msa density is often a poor indicator of thespatial structure of a region.
4income clustering is based on the standardized moran s i value for each msa.
moran s i is an indicator of spatial autocorrelation, or the tendency of like tracts to be located near one another.
5this indicator is the standard deviation of census tract level per capita income for each msa.s.j. rey, d.c. folch computers, environment and urban systems 35 431 441 433conducted in the us typically de ne an urban area as a metropolitan statistical area and a neighborhood as a census tract.
3.1. segregation indices for this research, we calculate four segregation indices to compare measurement methods of income segregation dissimilarity index , its spatial analogue d, neighborhood sorting index  and its spatial analogue generalized neighborhood sorting index . first we de ne the indices mathematically and then discuss the intuition behind their selection. in all cases the indices range from 0 indicating no segregation to 1 indicating complete segregation.we begin with d, which can be interpreted as the share of the poor population that would need to move to a new neighborhood to achieve an even distribution of population types across all neighborhoods. let pi,g denote the group gpopulation in area i and pi c22g pi c0pi gas the members of the population in area ithat are not members of group g, where piis the total population of area i, and pgis the total population of group gin the region. the dissimilarity index is given as  d 1 2x ipi g pg c0pi c22g p c22g c12 c12 c12 c12 c12 c12 c12 c12 c12 c12 1 table 1 summary statistics on indicators of us metropolitan statistical area variation, 2000.
number of tracts median pop density std dev per capita inc standardized moran s i of per capita inc minimum 10 71.2 2000.9 0  carson city, nv glen falls, ny hinesville, ga median 50 1220.6 6016.7 4.198 barnstable town, ma bismarck, nd dalton, ga eugene, orchampaign, illafayette, la maximum 4493 14093.9 60336.3 51.85 new york, ny new york, ny gulfport, ms new york, ny note city names represent the msa central city.
 zero represents insigni cant values for moran s i. 62 msas had an insigni cant value indicating no spatial autocorrelation.
fig. 2. us metropolitan statistical area variation, 2000.434 s.j. rey, d.c. folch computers, environment and urban systems 35 431 441dadjusts d to explicitly incorporate space into the index. it is de ned as  d adj d c0p ip jjwij si g c0sj g jp ip jwij 2  where si,grepresents the share of population gin area i and wijsigni es the value in the ith row and jth column of a spatial weights matrix where wij 1i f iandjare neighbors and 0 otherwise, and wii 0. the second term in d considers how each area relates to its neighbors by reducing region wide segregation if there is a difference in the group shares between the neighbors. the implication is that any difference between neighboring areas  shares increases overall interaction between the groups.
individual personal income values drive nsi .
it can be viewed as a ratio of the standard deviation of neighborhood mean personal income to the standard deviation of individual personal incomes. nsi is de ned as  nsi pn i 1hi c22yi c0y 2 ph k 1 yk c0y 2s  3  where nstands for the number of neighborhoods, i.e. areas, in the region, hdenotes the number of households in the region, hiis the number of households in area i,ykis the income of household k, c22yiindicates the mean household income for area iand yis the mean household income for the region. if individual neighborhoods have mean values c22yi far from the region mean, that implies a concentration of either high or low income households in those neighborhoods, i.e. segregation. this would raise the index value indicating higher segregation. conversely, neighborhoods with residents above and below the region mean would have means nearthe region mean resulting in a low numerator, and hence low segregation.
gnsi generalizes nsi into a form that allows for the inclusion of information from the spatial neighbors of each area. to some extent, this is a smoothing technique that averages area i s average personal income c22yiwith that of its neighbors to arrive at a new income value for i, namely c22y c3 i. gnsi is given as  gnsi pn i 1hi c22y c3 i c0y 2 ph k 1 yk c0y 2vuut 4  where c22y c3 i hi c22yi pn j 1wijhj c22yj hi pn j 1wijhj  the only difference between eqs. and is the replacement of c22yi with c22y c3 iwhich represents the average of iwith its neighbors.
the dissimilarity indices are structured entirely differently from the nsi indices, the primary difference being the root data on which they operate. dprovides a measure of the binary rich  and poor, while nsi uses the continuous variable income as its base. nsi directly targets income segregation, while d, a more exible measure, could equally be adapted to racial binaries such as  white and non white.  we choose dbecause it is the most commonly encountered segregation index. dand nsi are also ideal candidates because they have direct spatial alternatives in d and gnsi. eqs. and do not use any spatial information and so the spatial patterning of the areas should have no bearing on measured segregation. in contrast, the other two indices explicitly include the spatial structure de ned through the spatial weights matrix w.d is the most straightforward among a family of similar spatial versionsofdpresented in wong .wong extends morrill  by developing two variations on d that consider different ways of de ning neighborhood relationships. a key difference between d and gnsi is the approach for incorporating spatial structure. d joins the spatial and aspatial aspects of segregation in an additive form, while gnsi replaces data on an individual area with an average of its spatial neighbors.
another reason to employ these measures is that they are all feasible using publicly available census data. this is obvious in the cases of dand d which only use data at the area level.
nsi and gnsi are designed for use with person level data to compute the denominator. for empirical implementation, however, jargowsky utilized census data on the number of individuals within various income ranges to arrive at this denominator. in our study, individual people are simulated.
3.2. region size and shape in our simulations, each region is a square lattice made up of n areas, implying a shape of  np  c2  np . seven region sizes are simulated where ncan take a value of 25, 81, 169, 289, 441, 576 or 625. to provide some perspective, the phoenix mesa msa contained 696 census tracts in the 2000 census. each area within a region has the same number of residents, set at 5000. cross sectional studies comparing segregation between urban areas ll the empirical segregation literature. this spatial dimension is studied to help identify any systematic variation in the indices when regions of different sizes are compared.
3.3. sampling from a spatially correlated distribution our simulation of spatially correlated variables follows a procedure of building the correlation structure rst and then generating values that t both this structure and a known distribution function. these two steps are as follows.
3.3.1. correlation structure the modeling of a spatial data generating process requires the speci cation of a correlation structure. our study examines two speci cations the spatial autoregressive and spatial moving average , each of which considers different extents of a region s internal interconnectivity.
the sar model can be characterized as generating a global autocorrelation structure for the region . the estimation of any particular observation is dependent on its neighbors values, which in turn are dependent on their neighbors values. therefore, this structure links the entire region together. given the following sar model, y qwy e the variance covariance matrix of yis  vc y c138 r2 i c0qw 0 i c0qw c138 c01  where ydenotes an n c21 vector of observations on the variable of interest, eis an independent and identically distributed vector of error terms, r2represents the scalar variance, qis a spatial autocorrelation coef cient, wsigni es an n c2nmatrix of spatial weights describing the neighbor structure of the region and iindicates the n c2nidentity matrix.
the second model under consideration, the spatial moving average model, is the second most commonly seen spatial model in the empirical literature after the sar model . in this model, the spatial structure is a function of the error term alone, and as such the global interconnectivity seen in the sar model is not present here. anselin labels this a local models.j. rey, d.c. folch computers, environment and urban systems 35 431 441 435of autocorrelation since the correlation structure dies out after the second order neighbors. the speci cation of the sma model is as follows, y qw c15 e leading to the following spatial structure  vc y c138 r2 i qw 0 i qw c138  in cross sectional studies, researchers might mix regions that follow different spatial models. the two spatial models we explore in this study offer two representations of neighborhood interconnectivity, where one may expect that a neighborhood in a denser region is in uenced by higher order neighbors.6in contrast, in uence may dissipate quickly in a sprawling western us city where people move around by car and are able to easily leapfrog neighborhoods for shopping, services and employment. anselin presents a thorough treatment of the two models described in this section and rey and dev provides an application in the context of economic convergence.
as the equations above illustrate, the term qwis a key driver of the correlation structure, where the sign and magnitude of qdictate the strength and direction of the relationships. positive values ofqimply spatial clustering of like values, either high or low, while a negative qindicates spatial dispersion where high and low values are interlaced. spatial segregation indices are designed to detect this type of spatial pattern. the idea is that a poor neighborhood surrounded by poor neighborhoods should be considered more segregated than one surrounded by rich neighborhoods . in the latter scenario, the poor neighborhood is less isolated from the rich population and therefore has greater opportunity for interaction. the simulations are generated with the following sequence of values for q 0, 0.1, ..., 0.8, 0.9. we do not include the negative case since it did not occur in the empirical cases tested.7 the spatial weights matrix de nes which areas directly interact and the strength of that interaction . all the region designs use a queen contiguity matrix that de nes areas as neighbors if they share a border or a single point. the weights matrices in all cases are row standardized.
3.3.2. sampling distribution for the segregation indices chosen, it is necessary to simulate two values for each area the share of area population tting a certain category, in this case poor, and the average income for an area. both values require a distribution with a minimum value of zero, and in the former case, one with a distribution capped at 1.0. this precludes the normal distribution which produces values over the interval . the ideal distribution should also mimic empirical income distributions to the largest extent possible.
the lognormal distribution falls on the interval 0, 1 8and often matches empirical income distributions for individuals due to its positive skew .9to test if this holds for the distribution of neighborhoods, we plotted tract level per capita income for 359 msas using data from the 2000 us census. in most cases, the lognormal distribution ts the data reasonably well. for the simulations,we use the average of the lognormal parameters from the 359 msas, lln 9.816 and rln 0.330.
incorporating the spatial aspects of this simulation requires the construction of a multivariate lognormal sampling distribution.
the process for simulating correlated values from a lognormal distribution is as follows 10 1. generate an n c2nvariance covariance matrix, vc, via one of the spatial models de ned above, with r2 1 ,qbetween 0 and 0.9 and a queen contiguity weights matrix.
2. transform vcto a correlation matrix, r, containing values qij.11 3. since we essentially use a multivariate normal random number generator to create multivariate lognormal random values, the correlation matrix must be transformed in advance to account for the eventual exponentiation that will be performed. this isdone by transforming each value in the correlation matrix r via qadj ij log qij expr2 ln c01 1 c138to create radj.
4. compute the cholesky decomposition cofradj, which when multiplied by an uncorrelated vector  results in a correlated vector matching the correlation structure ofradj.
5. generate a vector of uncorrelated random values z, where z c24n and is of length n.
6. transform zinto zadjviacso that zadj c24n.
7. shift each simulated value to account for the overall mean by adding llnto each value in zadjto get zadj l.
8. exponentiate zadj lto arrive at correlated lognormal values.
tests of the above procedure showed that on average the a priori spatial correlation and lognormal distribution were maintained in the simulated values. it should be noted that a small decline inrlnwas observed as qincreased resulting in a narrowing of the lognormal distribution.
as a result of sampling from y c24ln, the expected value of yis 19,350. for the cases of nsi and gnsi, yis the per capita income of the area. the following section describes how the share of low income persons is determined for each area.
3.4. sampling within areas the nsi and gnsi indices require a distribution of personal income within the individual areas, and the dand d indices require the share of the population de ned as poor. following the literature cited above, we simulate personal income via a univariate lognormal distribution, avoiding the spatial correlation structure needed for the area level simulations. given a known mean  it is possible to build a speci c lognormal distribution for each simulated area according to the following rule  lln ln e y c138 c0r2 ln 2 5  a four step process is used to implement within area sampling. the  rst step involves the generation of a spatially correlated simulation of per capita income for each area, as described in the previous section. each area income, e y , is then plugged into eq. along with rln 0.330 to de ne each area s reference distribution. next, 5000 personal incomes are drawn from the distribution for each area. finally, the area per capita income is replaced by the average of the 5000 simulated personal incomes to ensure that the entire system matches exactly. in total, these four steps generate an entire region6neighbor order refers to the neighbors of neighbors, where the higher the order the greater the number of areas included in the computation.
7based on 2000 census bureau data, the moran s ivalue for per capita income in 359 msas was always greater or equal to 0.
8it is acknowledged that in empirical data household incomes can go negative, but for this simulation exercise it was deemed reasonable to assume yp0, y.
9cowell nds that incomes typically follow the lognormal or pareto distributions, with the pareto occurring more at the higher income levels.10seelienhard for further description of this method along with code for implementation in matlab.
11 qis used here simply to differentiate it from the autocorrelation coef cient q.436 s.j. rey, d.c. folch computers, environment and urban systems 35 431 441of personal incomes while maintaining the spatial correlation structure between areas .
with this full set of neighborhoods and residents in hand, we can determine the ratio of poor residents. this is the ratio of residents with an income below 11,600 to the total number of residents, which is always set to 5000.
3.5. scaling one motivation for varying spatial scale is to test the idea that the aggregation areas may not be representative of neighborhood boundaries within the region. krupka provides empirical evidence of this by testing data for us regions at different us census data scales . he hypothesizes that larger urban areas have larger neighborhoods and thus one complete neighborhood can t intoan aggregation boundary such as a tract, but with smaller neighborhoods in smaller urban areas, mixture occurs at the aggregation boundary level.
cowgill and cowgill raises the mismatch issue also, and advocates using smaller scale aggregation areas instead of tracts when measuring segregation. however, this approach has a known end game. if a region is continuously subdivided into smaller and smaller areas, in the limit, each area contains only one person.
since that person can only be rich or poor, the index must have a value re ecting complete segregation. therefore, upscaling is expected to reduce segregation and downscaling to increase it, regardless of some true underlying level of segregation.
simulations incorporating scale operate only on a 24 c224 region. to test the upscaling hypothesis, we simulate regions with 576 areas and one of the spatial correlation structures described above. this initial run is intended to model the actual spatial patterning of neighborhoods. these areas then scale up by factors of 4, 9 and 16 producing regions of 144 , 64 and 36  areas. the per capita income of an upscaled area results from averaging the per capita incomes from its constituent lower level areas. these upscaled areas mimic the actual aggregation boundaries that might group mismatched neighborhoods together.
all other simulations run for this study could be viewed as having a scale factor of 1, i.e. no scaling of the data.
3.6. iterations combining all the pieces results in 200 region designs. there are six region sizes, two spatial correlation models and ten values for q  resulting in 120 regions at a constantspatial scale. the scale cases results in an additional 80 regions for the four scaling factors. for each region design we run 500 simulations, compute the four segregation indices on each simulation, and nd the mean and standard deviation of each index. the results of these 800 mean and standard deviation values are presented in the following section.
4. simulation results the simulation stage explores the response of four segregation indices to variation in four spatial dimensions. we present the simulation results in two forms. the rst is a pair of gures, each encapsulating different dimensions and indices. both gures present variation in autocorrelation and the data generating model . we split the remaining two spatial dimensions across the two gures fig. 3 presents variation in region size, while fig. 4 presents variation in scale. these gures provide a high level visual representation of the results.the second presentation is an investigation of the sensitivity of measured segregation to the four spatial dimensions. this is done through a series of regressions with mean measured segregation as the dependent variable and the parameters used to build the regions as the independent variables . a signi cant coef cient would indicate that the associated spatial dimension affects measured segregation for the cases studied here. a total of eight regressions were run that split the results by index type and by tests on scale and size. all the regressions correspond directly to the two gures introduced above. speci cally, each pixel in the gure is an observation in a regression for example, there are 120 pixels in the left column of the upper left quadrant offig. 3 corresponding to the 120 observations used for the regression in column 1 of table 2 . the remainder of this section summarizes key ndings for each of the spatial dimensions investigated.
4.1. variation in region size segregation indices, be they aspatial or spatial, will ideally be immune to variation in region size. overall, we nd this to not be the case as the coef cient on region size is positive and signi cant in all cases . this implies that as region size increases measured segregation will tend to increase, a con rmation of johnston using a more general approach than his single illustrative example. however, fig. 3 does not mirror this bleak interpretation as two cases standout as likely drivers of the positive correlation. first, except for the smallest region size, 25 areas, measured segregation does not tend to vary much with region size.
this is indicated by a generally homogeneous color in fig. 3 , e.g.
the dissimilarity index for the sma model or a lack of horizontal banding, e.g. gnsi for the sar model. second, the increase in segregation with increases in region size are only noticeable for very high values of q. to test these hypotheses, we reran the regressions for regions with more than 25 areas and with q 0.9 and found the p value on region size remained highly signi cant for dand nsi, but became insigni cant for d and gnsi  and 0.905 for gnsi . overall, caution should be employed when making any comparisons of regions of different sizes using dor nsi. however, d and gnsi appear to correct for this problem in the typical scenarios considered in empirical work, i.e. when regions are not extremely small and simultaneously not exhibiting extremely high levels of spatial autocorrelation.
4.2. variation in spatial scale the feature we model in the tests on spatial scale is one of the most challenging for the empirical researcher. recall that this investigates the mismatch between the actual neighborhood struc ture and the one revealed to the researcher via public data sources  where the implication is that actual neighborhoods are smaller than aggregation areas. table 2 shows that scale has a highly signi cant and negative effect on measured segregation. therefore, as spatial scale increases, i.e. as more actual neighborhoods merge into one aggregation unit, segregation decreases. all eight mean graphs in fig. 4 show horizontal banding indicating systematic variation in segregation values as scale increases. each column of a particular graph is based the same simulated data from a 576 area region. the difference from one row to the next is the level of aggregation of the simulated data, starting from a baseline of 576 areas on the bottom row to the 16 1 case on top.
these results are what would be expected since blended aggregation areas will tend to smooth out segregated neighborhoods.
unlike the size case, the spatial measures, d and gnsi, are not able to correct for the scale problem. while the expected results emerge, this does not imply that the concept of segregation has been adequately captured for the regions. the large declines.j. rey, d.c. folch computers, environment and urban systems 35 431 441 437from the 1 1 to 4 1 case shows that segregation could be grossly under measured even in the smallest aggregation scenarios. this issue is compounded in cross region comparisons if one region s aggregation areas are at the 1 1 scale while another s are at 4 1.
4.3. variation in the spatial dgp the spatial dgp explores the difference between a broadly interconnected region, the sar model, and one where the spatial relationships are more localized, the sma model. a more interconnected region is expected to have smoother transitions from high to low income areas, where the alternative is a region with a more discontinuous surface of neighborhood income values. the regression results show that for six of the eight models , a region built using the sar model has a positive and signi cant impact on measured segregation over the alternative sma model. since neighboring areas are expected to be more similar in a sar region than a sma region, when actual neighborhoods are joined together into aggregation areas, as in the scaling case, or areas are smoothed together via a moving window as in the gnsi, it is more likely for similar populations to be joined for the sar model.
the two regressions that do not involve aggregation or smoothing, columns 1 and 5, show a signi cant and negative impact of the sar model over the sma model. we attribute this result, which islow in magnitude, to the potential dampening of the variance caused by the data generating process, i.e. the conversion of random values to spatially correlated values. lower overall variance will tend to reduce any measure of segregation since neighborhood values are more closely packed together. this implies then that the magnitudes on the coef cients for the sar dummy variables in the other regressions are lower bounds of what might be expected in empirical data.
in all cases, the results from the regressions can be observed in the two results gures. while the differences are generally easy to see for small region sizes and high values of q, tests of this hypotheses did not result in changes to the signi cance or direction of the results presented in table 2 meaning that the ndings are not isolated to the extreme cases.
4.4. variation in the magnitude of spatial autocorrelation regions constructed using higher levels of spatial autocorrelation have stronger clusters of high and low values, while lower spatial autocorrelation levels tend toward a random distribution of income values across the spatial landscape. this variation is implemented through values of qranging from 0.0 to 0.9. in principle, the magnitude of qshould have no impact on aspatial indices of segregation since the neighborhood relationships are not involved in the computation. in contrast, spatial autocorrelation is the spatial dimension that most spatial segregation measures, including fig. 3. simulation results for the region size case. notes this gure is divided into quadrants, each containing four graphs. the left quadrants present the mean and standard deviation for the aspatial indices with the right quadrants presenting the spatial indices and gnsi . the top pair of graphs in each quadrant present the results for the sar model, with the lower pair presenting the sma model. for each graph, rows represent the region size and columns the value of q, with color intensity being the magnitude of the mean or standard deviation value from 500 simulations.438 s.j. rey, d.c. folch computers, environment and urban systems 35 431 441the two explored in this paper, speci cally target higher clustering indicates higher segregation. to some extent these ideal results are borne out in our simulations. the four spatial segregation cases highlighted in table 2 , columns 2, 4, 6 and 8, all show a signi cant and positive impact on measured segregation for increases in q.
similarly, all but the 25 area regions on the right side of the two results gures show vertical banding in the mean segregation values indicating increasing values as qincreases. the low coef cientonqford in the size case is manifest in fig. 3 where the horizontal banding is the least noticeable.
in contrast to the results for the spatial measures, we nd that the aspatial measures have negative and signi cant coef cients for the models where regions vary in size, columns 1 and 5. as was stated above, we nd a slight reduction in the variance of our simulated data after the conversion to spatially correlated values, and we suspect this is causing the small negative coef cients for the fig. 4. simulation results for the scale case. notes this gure is divided into quadrants, each containing four graphs. the left quadrants present the mean and standard deviation for the aspatial indices with the right quadrants presenting the spatial indices and gnsi . the top pair of graphs in each quadrant present the results for the sar model, with the lower pair presenting the sma model. for each graph, rows represent the scaling factor and columns the value of q, with color intensity being the magnitude of the mean or standard deviation value from 500 simulations.
table 2impact of spatial parameters on measured segregation.
 dd dd nsi gnsi nsi gnsi size size scale scale size size scale scale constant 0.5463  0.3378 0.4540 0.3108 0.6772 0.1982 0.5611 0.1970    q c00.0206 0.0413 0.1211 0.1019 c00.0304 0.1867 0.1530 0.1729    size 0.0033 0.0024 0.0057 0.0041    scale c00.0167 c00.0095 c00.0219 c00.0117    sar c00.0075 0.0069 0.0255 0.0224 c00.0107 0.0382 0.0321 0.0466    rsquared 0.2644 0.5378 0.8264 0.8987 0.3276 0.7830 0.8251 0.8123 observations 120 120 80 80 120 120 80 80 t stats in parenthesis.
 sar is a dummy variable, where 1 indicates the sar model and 0 the sma model. size is region size divided by 100.
 c3signi cant at 0.10 level.
 signi cant at 0.05 level.
 signi cant at 0.01 level.s.j. rey, d.c. folch computers, environment and urban systems 35 431 441 439these two models. the remaining cases, columns 3 and 7, show signi cant and positive coef cients as qincreases. the positive coef cients on qare caused by neighborhoods with similar income values being more clustered as spatial autocorrelation increases  as a result the smoothing and aggregating processes tend to join neighborhoods with similar values as qincreases. the spatial measures ability to pick up this pattern is encouraging but the aspatial measures sensitivity to qin the scale case is discouraging.
5. discussion as the previous section shows, we nd that the four selected segregation measures are affected by variation in spatial con guration of the data meaning that care should be taken when segregation values are compared. we construct regions that are devoid of the myriad social dynamics that can vary from urban area to urban area. the regions are also isolated from the historic, technical and bureaucratic processes used to construct aggregation areas such as census tracts. hence this provides a relatively clean testbed for exploring the variability of segregation measures when appliedto all types of regions.
5.1. summary of results on the question of region size, we arrive at mixed results. the arguments in the literature that the positive correlation between region size and measured segregation is, at least partially, due to the construction of aggregation areas are still not fully resolved here. solid proof of this hypothesis would have come in the form of insigni cant parameters on region size since our neighborhoods are random constructions. however, we found small but signi cant coef cients for the indices. on a positive note, we do nd that the spatial measures we explore in this paper essentially remove this size effect for all but the smallest and most extremely clustered regions.
variation in scale is shown to be a signi cant problem faced by empirical researchers. wong provides a theoretical argument that greater autocorrelation will reduce the impact of scale variation. we were able to test that argument using our simulations and found it to hold in nearly all cases.
12however, while the effect is reduced, even regions with extreme spatial autocorrelation, i.e. q 0.9, can still be susceptible to the scale problem. a further confounding factor is the opposing effects from spatial scale and spatial autocorrelation. fig. 4 , which focuses on scale variation, clearly shows that for any particular value of q, measured segregation declines as scaling increases. however, it also shows that segregation increases as qincreases. we have a situation where segregation is highest in the lower right corner of any particular mean graph in this gure, and decreasing both as scaling increases and as spatial autocorrelation decreases. these independent effects from scale and spatial autocorrelation would be dif cult to disentangle in empirical data.
the nding that greater interconnectivity leads to signi cantly greater measured segregation for the spatial measures is understandable from a spatial analysis perspective, but may be counterintuitive from a social perspective. smooth income transitions from neighborhood to neighborhood could be an indicator of greater interaction in the population of different types while the sharper divisions resulting from the sma model might imply a population with greater social divisions.it is important to point out that the spatial measures do not uncover the differential impact space has on segregation relative to their aspatial counterparts. both spatial measures capture the effect clustering of like neighborhoods has on measured segregation both measures increase as qincreases. however, as can be seen in the results gures and in the construction of the measures themselves, the expected value of the spatial measure is always less than its aspatial counterpart. revisiting d from eq.  we can see that spatial segregation must always be lower than d except in the case of d 0, i.e. d d 0 .13the second term in eq.is only sensitive to absolute differences in neighboring pairs of areas, not whether the neighbor is more or less segregated. in principle, being surrounded by less segregated neighborhoods should contribute to reduced segregation, and the reverse if the neighborhoods are more segregated. as can be seen in eq. , the key difference between nsi and gnsi is the introduction of spatially smoothed data. since gnsi smooths neighboring values, the term c22y c3 itends to be closer to the regional mean than c22yiresulting gnsi being less than nsi on average. unlike d, it is possible for gnsi to be greater than its aspatial counterpart, and it is in some simulations however, it is not the expected result over many trials as shown in the simulation gures. overall, comparison of the magnitude of measured segregation reported by an aspatial index and its spatial counterpart should be done with consideration of these general properties.
6. conclusion this paper presented the performance of four segregation indices, dissimilarity index , adjusted dissimilarity index , neighborhood sorting index and generalized neighborhood sorting index , tested against varying degrees of spatial effects. the aspatial indices showed mild increases as region size increased, but this problem was corrected in most cases by their spatial counterparts. they all failed to accommodate for the situation where neighborhoods are grouped into larger aggregation areas. in fact, the biggest decline in measured segregation occurred in the shift from a 1 1 scaling factor to 4 1, results that indicate signi cant challenges for many empirical studies. regional integration, as measured by the spatial data generating process, had a positive impact on spatial segregation indicating that more interconnected regions may return an arti cially high level of segregation.
variation in spatial autocorrelation was identi ed by the spatial segregation measures, but the expected values of these measures are lower than their aspatial counterparts. we would expect that bringing space into the formulation should allow segregation to either rise or decline, but this is not the case.
the current work can be expanded in a number of directions.
first, additional measures of income segregation can be incorporated into the existing framework. entropy measures , gini index, coef cient of variation and many others offer possibilities. second, multi group measures of segregation would lend themselves well to the study of income segregation as they allow for multiple income ranges, and deserve further exploration. third, this work does not address variation of theoverall population. speci cally, all regions have the same expected value for average income or share of poor residents . since actual regions vary along this dimension an exploration of how these indices perform at different locations along the income or poverty distribution may provide interesting ndings.
12we measured change in mean segregation between each one step scale difference, i.e. 1 1 vs. 1 4, 1 4 vs. 1 9 and 1 9 vs. 1 16. this resulted in 240 percentchange measurements. we then identi ed any cases where percent change increasedbetween values of q, again measured as one step intervals, i.e. 0 vs. 0.1, 0.1 vs. 0.2, ...
the only increases occurred for mean gnsi for the sma model with high values of q.13even this does not hold in the case of neighborhoods with zero population. zero population neighborhoods do not contribute to d, but they do contribute to d.
while d 0 is unlikely to occur in any empirical dataset, census tracts with zero population do occur. in addition, negative values of d are possible  in some cases of negative spatial autocorrelation.440 s.j. rey, d.c. folch computers, environment and urban systems 35 431 441references