https doi.org 10.1177 15356841231195616city community 00 1 25  american sociological association 2023 doi 10.1177 15356841231195616 journals.sagepub.com home cty original article residential income segregation among families in the united states has grown in the past 45 years . these increases have been driven by families with children , and consequently have exacerbated income sorting in public schools . income differences across educational environments may increase inequality in chil dren s outcomes for several reasons, including less socioeconomic integra tion within schools or school districts and greater disparities in access to social resources embedded in families, such as parental educa tional attainment . one key concern posited in the income segre gation literature is that relatively income homogeneous residential contexts may suppress individuals concern for economic inequality and support for economic integra tion . however, alternative theoretical approaches identify diverse economic contexts as a source of social tension that may suppress individuals concern for those in different economic strata .
in this article, we assess the relationship  between residential income segregation and 1195616 cty xxx10.1177 15356841231195616city communitybischoff and sandusky research article 2023 1cornell university, ithaca, ny, usa corresponding author  kendra bischoff, department of sociology, cornell university, 323 uris hall, ithaca, ny 14853, usa. email kbischoff cornell.edulocal economic segregation  and opinions about income integration in schools kendra bischoff1 and emily sandusky1 abstract income segregated contexts may limit residents exposure to income inequality, suppressing concerns  about economic disparity and support for economic integration. in this article, we assess the relationship between residential income segregation and attitudes about the importance of income integration in  schools to understand the link between local economic conditions and individuals attitudes about social  equity. we test this relationship by measuring residential income segregation at two geographic scales meso level institutional segregation between school districts and micro level neighborhood segregation between census tracts. we find a negative relationship between school district income segregation in  individuals residential counties and beliefs about the importance of income integration in schools, but no  relationship between more fine grained neighborhood income segregation and these same beliefs. the results suggest that the degree to which residents problematize income segregated school contexts is associated with the relative income homogeneity of the school districts where they live, which represent the salient political boundary for the administration of educational services. these findings contribute to  broader knowledge about the varied pathways and spatial scales through which segregated environments  may shape beliefs about social and economic inequality.
keywords income segregation, public opinion, school integration, residential context, attitudes 2 city community 00 attitudes about the importance of income  integration in schools to understand the link between local conditions and individuals perceptions. income segregation describes the extent to which residential sorting by income occurs unevenly across geographic or geopo litical units . higher levels of income segregation mean that residential contexts have less income diversity than the larger geographic unit in which they are nested. we test this relationship by measuring resi dential income segregation at two scales meso level institutional segregation between school districts and micro level neighborhood segregation between census tracts. the social contexts of census tracts are akin to small neighborhoods that are delineated only by close geographic proximity. the social contexts of school districts are shaped by their larger geo graphic boundaries and also the fact that they confer membership in political entities charged with providing public education. using these two scales, we investigate whether economic conditions within spatial boundaries with dis parate geographic, social, and political mean ings have different implications for individuals attitudes. more specifically, we suggest that school districts are a tangibly and cognitively important institutional context for attitudes about school integration. we draw on a unique, nationally representative and geocoded dataset to link respondents attitudes to characteristics of their residential contexts. our results show that income segregation between school dis tricts within counties is negatively associated with county residents beliefs about the importance of income integration in schools. while residents of counties with relatively income homogeneous school districts are less likely to prioritize income integration in schools, eco nomic homogeneity at the neighborhood level appears to be less influential.
background the influence of residential economic  context on public opinion a rich social scientific literature has investigated trends in public opinion about a range of issues related to social inequality, includ ing individuals perceptions of local, state, and national problems, understanding of racial and economic inequality, and support for various public policies. individual level attributes, such as ideological orientation, social class, and gender, reliably predict opinions about social inequality however, socio logical theory suggests that people s residen tial and geopolitical contexts may also influence their knowledge and attitudes about social stratification in their local com munities and nationally. indeed, a large body of research shows that residential contexts shape individual level outcomes, such as educational attainment, health, and employ ment . understanding how social and spatial contexts add to, or interact with, individual level attributes to shape beliefs and attitudes expands basic knowledge about the complex factors that influence public opinion, and helps uncover the pathways through which social inequality is developed and maintained.
local geographic space, often defined as  the residential neighborhood, is hypothesized to affect individuals through a range of direct and indirect influences, such as interpersonal contact, social cohesion and trust among resi dents , quality of public goods, density of local organizations, levels of crime, environmental conditions, and access to information through observation . drawing from this larger set of mechanisms found in the contextual effects literature, we focus on two pathways that con nect an individual s local economic context to their beliefs about economic inequality. first, spatial proximity provides an opportunity for routine interaction between neighbors and co residents and for the potential development of close social ties . interpersonal contact through casual encoun ters and social networks situated in resi dential environments transmits information bischoff and sandusky 3 about local economic well being. although  the socioeconomic status of individuals is not always obvious or visible to observers, con versations with neighbors and acquaintances may reveal information about a recent job layoff, vacation plans, or the financial effects of health or housing troubles.
intergroup contact between individuals of different races, ethnicities, and other socially salient groups can reduce prejudice and enhance out group knowledge and empa thy because it provides an opportunity for people to learn about those who are different from themselves, poten tially dispelling stereotypes, and to generate emotional connections, or affective ties, with disparate others . allport s contact the ory predicted that intergroup contact is most effective for reducing prejudice under certain conditions, such as when groups have equal status in a situation and when individuals from those groups cooperate to work toward common goals, though a review of the litera ture concludes that intergroup contact often produces positive effects even in the absence of these optimal conditions . a good deal of the interpersonal contact lit erature focuses on racial difference however, an extension of intergroup contact theory suggests that interaction between individuals from different socioeconomic groups may increase understanding and concern for soci oeconomic integration in an economically unequal society. through these interactions, individuals may update their prior beliefs about their own position on the economic lad der and develop a more comprehensive pic ture of economic variation in their residential contexts. conversely, intergroup contact may create tension between groups. scholars have argued that racial diversity can lead majority groups to feel threatened, thereby reducing out group tolerance . others have reasoned that socially diverse interactions may create divisions under conditions of con solidated social difference when membership in an ethnoracial group strongly predicts other social characteristics, such as religious affiliation or income, thereby reducing poten tial points of commonality among members of different ethnoracial groups . extending this logic to income diverse interactions produces uncertainty in how mixed income communities shape individuals beliefs.
a second spatial mechanism that may  shape a person s perceptions of the economic status of their neighbors and of their com munity at large is their local information environment, or the knowledge one can glean from observing their local surroundings. vis ible indicators such as types of businesses, the make and year of cars people drive, and the price of homes convey the level and range of individuals economic well being in the community, while the quality of public infra structure helps convey the collective eco nomic status of a place. local media outlets also contribute to a community s economic information environment by reporting on issues of poverty and privilege, highlighting volunteer efforts, and covering local policy topics such as new housing development and social services. this type of information may draw attention to the diversity of economic interests in a community or reinforce homo geneous conditions. empirical evidence sup ports the theory that individuals can gather relatively accurate contextual information from their local environments through observation and use this information to inform broader conclusions. for example, newman, velez, and, hartman demonstrate that county and zip code level unemployment rates are predictive of residents reports of the difficulty of finding a job in their commu nity. individuals evaluations of the trajectory of the national economy are influenced by home foreclosure rates within the boundaries of their local media market and in the state where they live , and lower income residents of states with greater income inequality are more likely to accurately report growing income disparity at the national level .4 city community 00 scale and boundary a topic that has received less attention in this  literature is how local economic information available through observations and interpersonal contact may be encountered and interpreted differently depending on the scale of the context and the salience of its boundaries. in this framework, residential neighborhoods can be considered a micro context, characterized by regular, spontaneous opportunities to observe and interact with a relatively small group of neighbors within socially determined, often imprecise boundaries. institu tional boundaries, like those created by school district catchment areas, are politically determined and confer access to specific public goods. political boundaries provide individu als with place based identities that are unam biguous and uniform, and serve as a foundation for structuring contextual information .
local public institutions, such as schools,  are likely more inclusive of an area s total population than personal networks, given the tendency for individuals to socialize and affiliate with people similar to themselves . this tendency toward homophily also leads to ethnoracial and socioeconomic friendship segregation, which is well documented in educational settings, and limits the extent and nature of interpersonal interactions . nevertheless, participation in local public schools or other open institutions may highlight the economic advantage, disad vantage, or inequality present in a commu nity beyond individuals close social ties or residential blocks. this may occur, in part, because school districts generally encompass several, and sometimes many, socially determined residential neighborhoods. in addition, most u.s. school districts have fewer second ary schools than elementary schools, making middle and high schools less acutely local ized. this structure mechanically increases school integration as students age through local school systems , though the degree of exposure to social difference depends on the characteristics of the total school district population. finally, although schools can be less socially diverse than their residential catchment areas due to nonresidential school choice options , school districts can also draw individual school catchment boundaries in ways that promote school integration across micro segregated neighborhood contexts.
residents interpretation of contextual  economic information within school districts is likely informed by the particular function of local schools in their lives . for example, parents whose children will soon start school may actively seek information about local districts and those with current students share a goal of high quality education for their children. collaboration toward this aim may create some of the conditions at the foundation of allport s con tact hypothesis. nevertheless, school district boundaries are arguably salient to a broader swath of residents for financial, political, and social reasons. in most cases, school districts levy taxes and are governed by an inde pendent, elected board of officials that make decisions about matters such as curricula, disciplinary policies, budgets, and individ ual school attendance boundaries. given the decentralized nature of k 12 schooling in the united states, the policies and practices of local school districts reflect the community s beliefs about the role of schools in socializ ing and educating children, concretizing the salience of citizenship in these sociopolitical units. the perceived quality of local schools, as measured by standardized test scores, is also reflected in home prices , affecting both parents of children in school and homeowners alike.
in their call to address where, when, why,  and for whom residential contexts shape outcomes, sharkey and faber empha sized using theory and evidence to find the appropriate match between the spatial scale and the social process under examination. school districts represent a meso context in which residents local neighborhoods are reflected, but also refracted through the bischoff and sandusky 5 mission of public education and, often, a  geographically more expansive view of local community. at the same time, school dis trict boundaries play a large role in creating unequal school environments because they significantly shape schools resources and determine the composition of the student population. for these reasons, school district boundaries are likely to be both familiar and meaningful to residents, and may be particularly salient for attitudes about income integration in schools.
income segregation income integration makes intergroup contact between disparate income groups more likely and it ensures that local information contexts are heterogeneous. conversely, individuals who live in income segregated communities are relatively isolated from contact with indi viduals from different income groups. income segregation may stunt understanding across social boundaries and limit information about structural sources of inequality and mobility . because income segregation may skew perceptions of the broader extent of economic and social issues and limit the formation of affective ties between people in different income groups, scholars have argued that segregated communities may shape atti tudes about social inequality and social wel fare policy .
evidence from new york city shows that  residents in income diverse neighborhoods perceive more local income disparity and report greater concern about the income gap in both new york city and nationally than their coun terparts in more homogeneous neighborhoods . research that has more specifically assessed the association between residential segregation and individual attitudes finds that affluent white residents of income segregated metropolitan areas report more positive assessments of local job opportu nities, crime level, and healthcare accessibility than nonaffluent white individuals who live in the same metro area .a related body of research uses field  experiments to test the effects of brief expo sure to evidence of economic inequality in one s local context on an immediate show of support for redistributive policies. in affluent boston suburbs, the presence of a poverty stricken person reduced the likelihood that relatively high income passersby would sign a petition in support of a millionaire s tax, suggesting that brief proximity to extreme income difference reduced immediate sup port for one redistributive policy targeting high earners . although this field experiment eliminates bias from non random residential selection that may arise in observational studies, such as those cited above, it is not clear that brief encounters with social difference influence individu als attitudes in the same way as prolonged exposure to social difference in residential communities. this field experiment relates to the effects of one s local information environment, but the mechanisms are dis tinct from residential context because they are momentary pieces of information that do not allow for the development of social ties or cooperative activities between dispa rate individuals. nevertheless, evidence from both observational and experimental research contributes to the broad understanding of how exposure to economic inequality, or lack thereof, influences attitudes about economic inequality in society.
attitudes about social integration in  schools elementary and secondary school integration  is a social issue that is particularly tied to local geographic context because schools are inherently local institutions. research on atti tudes about racial integration in schools surged in the wake of large scale school desegregation efforts in the united states in the 1960s and 1970s. as an issue of great importance to debates about equality of opportunity and access to social mobility, trends in attitudes about racial integration in schools were viewed as a marker of progress 6 city community 00 toward racial equity. by the 1980s, research  showed that people overwhelmingly sup ported the principle of racially integrated schools , though there was more varied support for specific policies that would achieve racial integration in schools . advancements in the public opinion literature on school segregation linked individual beliefs to local context pri marily to disentangle the reasons for white individuals opposition to busing, the most prominent policy solution at the time. by including features of an individual s local context, these studies extended the literature by incorporating estimates of the personal impact of such policies on individuals . as such, these studies did not focus on how local context influenced individuals general support or opposition to racial integration in schools, but instead focused on attitudes about specific policy solutions.
although racial segregation is an enduring dimension of american schools , it is now unconstitutional to assign children to schools based on their race ethnicity alone as a result of the 2007 parents involved supreme court case. as income segregation between schools has risen , socioeconomic test score gaps have increased , and direct solutions to racial segregation have waned , understanding attitudes about economic segregation in schools has become increasingly relevant to education equity efforts. a recent report based on a nationally representative sample of parents of school age children found that 45 percent of respondents thought it was extremely important or very important that the public schools in their community had a mix of students from different income backgrounds. higher income parents reported that economic diversity is less important than lower income parents did, but political ideol ogy was the strongest predictor of views on the importance of economic diversity . a separate study reported that 62 percent of adults said economic school segregation was very important or somewhat important to them, while 70 percent said more should be done to integrate low and high poverty schools . the available pub lic opinion research thus shows that a sig nificant portion of americans are concerned about economic segregation in schools, but it remains unclear how individuals residential context might influence these attitudes.
in this article, we seek to understand the  pattern of associations between individuals local geographic context and their beliefs about the importance of economic integra tion in schools. drawing on the sociologi cal theories and empirical findings outlined above, we hypothesize that individuals who live in more income segregated contexts are less likely to believe that income integration in schools is important while acknowledg ing that conflict based theories might suggest otherwise. we explore this relationship at two geographic scales by computing residential household income segregation at the micro level between neighborhoods and at the meso level between school districts, which are arguably the focal boundary for attitudes about income integration in schools. we further explore the relationship for parents of children in school who are embedded actors in educational institutions and for whom school district contexts and attendance poli cies may be particularly salient.
data and method data we fielded an original survey question about the importance of economic integration in u.s. schools on a nationally representative sample of 1,000 adults. the survey was con ducted by the survey research institute at cornell university between september 19, 2016 and december 13, 2016.
1 the dependent variable is derived from a question prompt that first informed respondents that bischoff and sandusky 7 families are more residentially separated by  income now than they were 40 years ago. respondents were then asked to indicate how important it is that children attend school with students from a wide range of economic backgrounds. the response choices were as follows 1 not important at all, 2 some what important, 3 important, 4 very important, and 5 extremely important.
2,3 measuring local context in this study, we seek to understand the link between contextual economic factors and individuals opinions. the county is a theo retically appropriate measure of local context because our key contextual construct is a measure of spatial economic segregation. as has been argued in previous research on the relationship between economic context and public opinion, using the county to measure local context is often more appropriate than smaller geographies because they capture labor market dynamics and broader economic distributions than towns and neighborhoods . in addition, counties are more appropriate for assessing the poten tial for school income integration than metro politan areas, which are much larger geographic units often used in segregation research.
4 to assess each respondent s experience of economic integration vis vis other proximate residential spaces, it is necessary to measure the distribution of income in a geo graphic unit larger than their immediate resi dential environment . although the population and land size of counties vary widely across the united states, counties are mid size geopolitical units that are meaningful to most americans.
respondents were not asked to identify  their county of residence in the survey, but they were asked to identify their residential zip code. we use self reported zip codes to derive the county of residence for all respond ents except a small number of cases in which the zip code was missing or invalid. in these cases, we use the area code from the respond ent s phone number to determine county of residence, but only if the respondent was reached on a landline.
5 some survey research  relies exclusively on the area code from the respondent s phone number to identify geo graphic location. however, the ubiquity of cell phones makes area codes a suboptimal means of identifying county of residence because cell phone numbers are not necessarily tied to place of residence.
6 approximately  61 percent of the survey respondents for this study were reached on a cell phone. in total, there are 951 cases in our sample with valid county identifiers.
we match zip codes to counties using  the u.s. department of housing and urban development s december 2016 zip code county crosswalk. the majority of zip codes are nested within counties, and in cases where zip codes span multiple counties, we use hud s measure of residential overlap to assign the respondent to the county in which the greatest proportion of the zip code s resi dential population is located.
7 there are 517  unique counties represented in the analytic sample.
estimating income segregation as described above, we contrast the experi ence of county level micro segregation to county level meso segregation and operationalize these two geo graphic scales with census tracts and school districts, respectively.
8 this approach builds  on scholarly discussions about potential vari ation in the causes and consequences of seg regation at different geographic and geopolitical scales . we compute income segregation using binned household income data from the 2014 2018 american community survey tabulated into tracts and school district boundaries, the latter of which we obtain from the national center for edu cation statistics education demographic and geographic estimates.
9 we use the common 8 city community 00 core of data to link school districts to the appropriate county.
we measure income segregation using the  rank order information theory index , an evenness measure that compares variation in household incomes within tracts or school districts to variation in household incomes in the county where they are located . this measure ranges from a theoreti cal minimum of 0 to a theoretical maxi mum of 1 . we multiply the index by 100 for ease of interpretation . because income data are  based on a sample of respondents in the american community survey, and because small sample sizes create upward bias in income segregation measures, we apply a bias correction technique to account for the possibility of small sample sizes in any of the geographic units in our study .
10 ultimately, we dichotomize county level  income segregation into counties with tract or school district income segregation below and above the population weighted national median ,  meaning the thresholds represent the median level of county level segregation experienced by u.s. residents. although operationaliz ing income segregation into blunt categories discards fine grained information, comparing counties that have meaningfully different levels of income segregation best captures the contextual mechanisms we described above. in addition, in places where school districts are coterminous with counties, such as in many southern states and some large cities, county level income segregation between school districts is zero. twenty eight percent of the 517 unique counties in our analytic sample have zero income segregation because they contain only one school district.
national variation in the structure of  school district boundaries leads to differences in the relationship between counties and school districts. a county based school dis trict with between school district income segregation equal to zero may not feel inte grated because there is still localized segre gation. nevertheless, that county is arguably socially and politically integrated in ways that may not be true of demographically similar counties with more fragmented school district systems. whereas tract level segrega tion does not depend on political boundaries, and therefore may be experienced more con sistently across the united states, 11 variation in school district context presents an opportunity to observe the salience of meso level institutional contexts as socially con structed, politically meaningful units. table 1 presents county level tract and school district income segregation for select cases to illus trate variation in school district structure and its relationship to income segregation. san francisco county, ca consists of one urban district covering the city of san francisco and therefore has no between school district segregation, but slightly above median neigh borhood segregation. miami dade county, fl consists of one large county based dis trict covering many municipalities, includ ing the city of miami. miami dade also has no between district segregation and above median neighborhood segregation. wayne county, ny , adjacent to monroe county and its central city of rochester, is characterized by approximately the median level of school district income segregation in u.s. counties, but below median neighborhood segregation. somewhat typical in structure, wayne county contains 11 suburban, town, and rural school districts. a more politically fragmented configuration is observed in cook county, il , cuyahoga county, oh , and essex county, nj , which all contain central city school districts and between 19 and 115 autonomous suburban districts. essex and cuyahoga counties are characterized by very high school dis trict and neighborhood segregation whereas cook county has above median, but more moderate, school district and neighborhood bischoff and sandusky 9 segregation. finally, hamilton county, tx  consists of three rural school districts and has far below median school district and neigh borhood segregation.
in addition to our preferred measure of  income segregation, we estimate models using the continuous rank order information theory index and the square root of the rank order information theory index, which reduces the skew and kurtosis of the raw measure.
12 we present estimates using these  alternative measures in the robustness anal ysis section.
analytic strategy the analytic sample includes all respondents with nonmissing responses to the variables in our statistical models and a valid geocode . we estimate ordinal logistic regression models to test the association between individual and contextual characteristics and opinions about economic integration in schools. we cluster standard errors at the county level to help account for dependencies among respondents from the same county.
13,14 in the analyses, we include a set of control  variables at both the county and individual levels that may be correlated with income segregation and the outcome of interest. at the county level, we control for median household income and the percentage of households that are below the poverty line, both of which reflect economic well being within a county. we control for the percent age of the county population that identifies as black or african american because, on average, black americans have lower incomes and less wealth than white americans . this measure gives some purchase on the potential sali ence of race and racial bias in the forma tion of attitudes about income integration in schools. we obtain county level demographic data from the 2014 2018 american com munity survey, which has a midpoint of 2016 to match the survey data. we also include the share of the county population that voted for the republican candidate in the 2016 presi dential election to control for local political climate, a likely conduit for political values and information that may shape residents understanding of economic integration.
15 we  obtain county level presidential vote share data from the congressional quarterly v oting and elections collection. finally, we include population density the number of people per square mile to control for differences in frequency and character of opportunities for interpersonal interaction in neighborhoods and school districts.
using individual level information from  survey respondents, we control for republi can political party identification t able 1. examples of variation in county level segregation by school district boundary configuration.
county schools districts in countybetween tract  segregation between school district  segregation  cook county, il chicago city 115 small city  or suburb10.56 3.09 cuyahoga county, oh cleveland city 30 suburb 13.94 9.45 essex county, nj newark city 19 suburb 17.29 14.03 hamilton county, tx three town or rural 1.42 0.22 miami dade county, fl miami dade county 10.65 0.00 san francisco county, ca san francisco city 8.20 0.00 wayne county, ny 11 suburb, town, or rural 3.10 1.38 source. household income and number of school districts, 2014 2018 american community survey, and national  center for education statistics.10 city community 00 and social ideology . in  addition to the close link between partisanship  and attitudes about economic inequality, polit ical and ideological perspectives likely serve as lenses through which individuals observe and interpret contextual economic conditions. in addition, we control for a standard set of demographic features including race eth nicity , age, marital status, gender, educational attainment, income, and nativity. we combine several racial ethnic cat egories due to small sample sizes in the data. nevertheless, the results remain the same if the other racial ethnic category is disag gregated. we control for respondents house hold income using low , middle , and high income catego ries, which are condensed from nine catego ries in the original data. finally, we control for homeownership and for the presence and school enrollment of children in respondents households. both of these measures indicate increased investment in one s local commu nity, either because of personal financial stake in the valuation of public goods or because of direct use of elementary and secondary educa tion services.
results table 2 presents descriptive statistics for individual characteristics of survey respon dents. thirty two percent of respondents have household incomes under 50,000, the threshold for the low income category, 41 percent of respondents are in the middle income category, and the remaining 27 percent have income over 100,000. fifty four percent of the sample are married and half are female. forty five percent have a college degree, two thirds own their homes, and 90 percent were born in the united states. among survey respondents in this sample, 72 percent identified as non hispanic white, eight percent as non hispanic black or afri can american, nine percent as hispanic, and 11 percent as non hispanic other race eth nicity. the mean age is just under 50 years old. the sample is fairly evenly divided between households with no children, house holds with children in public or private school, and households with adult children who are no longer enrolled in school. the mean self reported social ideology of 4.13 falls between moderate and slightly con servative on the 7 point scale and 27 percent of respondents identify themselves as republican.
16 table 3 presents descriptive statistics for  contextual characteristics of the counties in which survey respondents reside. the pri mary explanatory factors in our analyses are between tract and between school district income segregation within counties, both of which are dichotomized around the popula tion weighted median among all u.s. coun ties, as described above. forty six percent of respondents live in counties with above median neighborhood income segregation , while forty seven percent of respondents live in counties with above median income segregation between school districts. on the whole, there is less income segregation between school districts than census tracts because school districts gen erally encompass larger populations, often with greater income diversity. on average, just over 47 percent of voters in respondents counties supported the republican candidate in the 2016 presidential election. the median household income is 62,110 and 13.31 percent of households are below the poverty line. on average, black residents comprise 11.67 percent of the population in respond ents counties. the black population share ranges from zero to 62 percent. the average population density in respondents counties is 1,980 persons per square mile, and density ranges from fewer than four to over 72,000 persons per square mile.
figure 1 describes survey respondents attitudes toward income integration in schools. the data illustrate fairly broad agreement bischoff and sandusky 11 on the importance of children of different  income levels attending schools together with over 70 percent of respondents reporting that income integration is either important, very important, or extremely important. approximately, 10 percent of respondents indicated that income integration in schools is not important at all.  table 4 presents results from ordered  logistic regression models that estimate the association between the perceived importance of income integration in schools and resi dential income segregation. models 1 and 2 estimate the relationship between the perceived importance of income integration in schools and micro level residential income segregation . model 1 shows no significant relationship between residence in a county with above median neighborhood segregation and the perceived importance of income integration in schools, controlling for the contextual socioeconomic and political factors noted above. this association remains insignificant with the inclusion of a set of individual characteristics in model 2. overall, the first two models show no evidence of a meaningful association between micro segre gation and expressed importance of children from different income levels attending school together.
models 3 and 4 assess the relationship  between the perceived importance of income integration in schools and meso level resi dential income segregation . model 3 indicates a negative and statistically significant relationship  between residence in a county with above median income segregation across school districts and perceived importance of income integration in schools, controlling for the same con textual socioeconomic and political factors included in the first two models. the addition of individual level characteristics in model 4 increases the magnitude and significance t able 2. individual level descriptive statistics .
individual level characteristics mean or proportion sd social ideology 4.13 1.68 republican party 0.27  household income  low income 0.32   middle income 0.41   high income 0.27  married 0.54  female 0.50  bachelor s degree or higher 0.45  u.s. born 0.90  homeowner 0.68  race ethnicity white 0.72   black 0.08   hispanic 0.09   other 0.11  age 49.97 17.56 children in household no children 0.30   children in school 0.35   adult children 0.35 12 city community 00 level of the coefficient on school district  income segregation , which suggests  that one or more of the individual level characteristics suppress the estimated association between school district income segregation and integration attitudes in model 3. accord ing to this model, the log odds of report ing greater perceived importance of income integration in schools are 0.39 lower among residents of counties with income segregation above the national median, compared to their counterparts in counties with below median income segregation.
with the exception of segregation measures, the estimated associations between the perceived importance of income integration in schools and county and individual level control variables are similar across models that include between tract and between school district segregation. the magnitude and significance of school district income segregation stand out among the contextual variables in model 4 , though the black pop ulation share and 2016 republican vote share also have negative, statistically significant associations with the perceived importance of school income integration. the coefficients for median household income, poverty rate, and population density are nonsignificant.
because favoring social integration is  often coded as a liberal perspective, the direc tion and significance of many of our indi vidual level control variables conform with expectations. for example, opinions regard ing the importance of income integration in schools are informed by social ideology and political orientation. social conserva tives and republicans are significantly less likely than their respective counterparts to report that economic integration is important, controlling for all individual and contextual t able 3. county level descriptive statistics .
county level characteristics mean or proportion sd minimum maximum share of respondents in counties with  between tract income segregation above  weighted national median0.46   income segregation in counties  above median 10.47 1.75 7.70 17.29  income segregation in counties  below median 4.23 2.32 0.00 7.65 share of respondents in counties  with between school district income segregation above weighted national median0.47   income segregation in counties  above median 4.18 2.06 1.50 14.03  income segregation in counties  below median 0.36 0.48 0.00 1.49 2016 r epublican vote share 47.17 16.66 4.09 85.91 median household income 62.11 16.54 24.09 136.27 proportion of households below poverty  line13.31 4.67 3.70 34.80 black population share 11.67 12.00 0.00 62.02 population density 1.98 6.72 0.00 72.05 source. 2014 2018 american community survey, national center for education statistics, and congressional  quarterly voting and elections collection.bischoff and sandusky 13 variables. results from models 2 and 4 indicate that women are more likely than men to believe that school integration is important, and black and hispanic individuals are sig nificantly more likely than white individuals to report that it is important for schools to be economically integrated. however, respond ents income and the presence of children in the household, two factors that seem aligned with opinions about income integration in schools, are not significantly associated with perceived importance of income integration in schools, net of other factors in the models.
to help interpret the results, we compute  predicted probabilities for each level of the outcome variable for respondents who live in counties with segregation below and above the population weighted national median. the marginal changes and associated statisti cal significance levels presented in appendix table a1 show that modeling a shift from below to above median tract level income segregation does not significantly change the perceived importance of income integra tion. table a2 presents the marginal changes to predicted probabilities with a shift from below to above median income segregation between school districts. the average likeli hood of reporting that it is not important at all that children attend school with stu dents from a wide range of economic back grounds is 3.4 percentage points higher for respondents who live in counties with above versus below median income segregation. at the other extreme, the average likelihood of reporting that it is extremely important that children attend school with students from a wide range of economic backgrounds is 7.1 percentage points lower for respondents who live in counties with above versus below median income segregation. taken together, these results provide a more detailed, sub stantive depiction of the negative association between residence in relatively income homogenous school districts and expressed importance of income integration among chil dren in schools.
parents of children in school next, we analyze the association between meso level income segregation and opinions about economic integration in schools among parents of children in school for  figure 1. importance of economic integration in schools .14 city community 00 t able 4. estimated log odds coefficients from ordered logistic r egression models predicting  perceived importance of income integration in schools .
  contextual variables between tract income segregation above  weighted national median0.08 0.07    between school district income segregation  above weighted national median 0.32 0.39    2016 r epublican vote share 0.02 0.00 0.02 0.01    median household income 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00   share of households below poverty line 0.01 0.02 0.01 0.02   black population share 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01    population density 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00   individual variables social ideology 0.24 0.24    republican party 0.25 0.28    household income low income 0.01 0.02    high income 0.09 0.11   married 0.15 0.18   female 0.28 0.29    bachelor s degree or higher 0.22 0.24   u.s. born 0.04 0.01   homeowner 0.02 0.06   race ethnicity black 0.68 0.66     hispanic 0.59 0.58     other 0.32  0.33    age 0.00 0.00   bischoff and sandusky 15   children in household   children in school 0.17 0.21    adult children 0.04 0.08   cut point 1 3.11 3.26 3.40 3.59    cut point 2 1.82 1.90 2.10 2.23    cut point 3 1.09 1.12 1.37 1.44   cut point 4 0.13 0.16 0.15 0.15   pseudo r20.007 0.036 0.009 0.039 chi squared 23.933 100.630 25.824 105.711 note. clustered standard errors in parenthesis.
 p .10 p .05 p .01 p .001 two tailed tests.
whom the school district context may be particularly relevant. overall, parents of children  in school report beliefs about the importance of income integration in schools that closely reflect those of the full sample of respondents . over 70 percent of parents of children in school report that income integration is either important, very important, or extremely important. approximately 10 percent of the subsample report that income integration in schools is not important at all. compared to the full sample, parents of children in school are more likely to be in the high income category, are more likely to be married, are younger, and are slightly more likely to identify as a republican.
table 5 presents results from ordered  logistic regression models that estimate the association between meso level residential income segregation between school districts and perceived importance of income integra tion in schools among parents with children in school. models 1 and 2 are identical to those presented for the full sample in mod els 3 and 4 in table 4. similar to the full sample results, there is a significant, negative association between residence in a county with above median school district segrega tion and perceived importance of income integration in schools among this subsample. to ease interpretation, table a3 presents the predicted probabilities for each level of the outcome variable. among parents of children in school, the average likelihood of reporting that it is not important at all or somewhat important that children attend school with students from a wide range of economic backgrounds is 5.4 or 6.3 percentage points higher, respectively, for respondents who live in counties with above versus below median income segregation. likewise, the average likelihood of reporting that it is extremely important that children attend school with students from a wide range of economic backgrounds is 11.6 percentage points lower for respondents who live in counties with above versus below median income segre gation. the marginal effects of a shift from below median to above median school dis trict segregation are larger in magnitude for parents of children in school than for our full sample, indicating that beliefs about income integration in schools among this subpop ulation are more sensitive to homogeneity t able 4. 16 city community 00 t able 5. estimated log odds coefficients from ordered logistic r egression models predicting  perceived importance of income integration in schools .
  contextual variables between school district income segregation above  weighted national median 0.59 0.65    2016 r epublican vote share 0.01 0.00   median household income 0.01 0.01   share of households below poverty line 0.03 0.06   black population share 0.00 0.02   population density 0.11 0.12    individual variablessocial ideology 0.16     republican party 0.71    household income   low income 0.22    high income 0.03   married 0.03   female 0.19   bachelor s degree or higher 0.24   u.s. born 0.72    homeowner 0.22   race ethnicity   black 0.68     hispanic 0.68    other 0.77    age 0.01   cut point 1 1.84 1.01   bischoff and sandusky 17   cut point 2 0.54 0.36   cut point 3 0.19 1.15   cut point 4 1.44 2.50   pseudo r20.020 0.056 chi squared 18.412 59.047 note. clustered standard errors in parenthesis.
 p .10 p .05 p .01 two tailed tests.t able 5.  within local institutional contexts. this finding supports our theoretical expectation that the salience and interpretation of economic conditions within and across school districts will vary based on individuals degree and type of exposure to these contexts.
robustness analysis we verify the robustness of associations between school district income segregation and perceived importance of economic inte gration by estimating models using two alternative income segregation measures, the continuous bias corrected rank order informa tion theory index and its square root, to  correct for a skewed distribution. appendix tables a4 and a5 present the marginal changes to responses at each level of the dependent variable, for the full sample and subsample of parents, respectively, using estimates derived from the supplemental measures of income segregation between school districts. the results from these models align with estimates produced using the dichotomized income seg regation measure. with all covariates held as observed, the average likelihood of reporting that it is not important at all that children attend school with students from a wide range of economic backgrounds increases by 1.1 percentage points with a one standard devia tion increase in the continuous income segregation measure and 1.4 percent age points with a one standard deviation increase in the square root of income segregation. among parents of children in school the corresponding increases in the average likelihood of reporting that income inte gration in school is not important at all are 2.4 and 2.6 percentage points, respectively. the average likelihood of reporting that income integration in school is extremely important decreases by 2.1 and 2.7 percent age points, respectively, with one standard deviation increase in the income segregation and the square root measures. among parents of children in school, the corresponding decreases are 4.4 and 4.8 percentage points.
the pattern of results is clear and consistent across the three measures of meso level income segregation between school districts. marginal changes with a one standard devia tion increase in the square root of income segregation are significant at p .05 at all  levels of the outcome variable, and marginal changes with a one standard deviation increase in the continuous income segrega tion index are significant at p .10 for three  levels of the response variable. among the subset of parents with children in school, all marginal changes to the square root of income segregation are significant at p  .05 and marginal changes to the continuous measure are significant at p .05 or p  .10, depending on the level of the dependent variable. supplemental analyses using alternative measures of between tract income seg regation produce marginal changes that are nonsignificant. appendix table a6 presents marginal changes using estimates derived 18 city community 00 from alternative measures of betweentract income segregation. the full ordered logistic regression results for supplemental analyses regressing attitudes about mixed income schools on two alternative meas ures of income segregation the continuous bias corrected rank order information theory index and its square root are available from the authors upon request.
as noted above, 28 percent of the counties in our sample have only one school district and are therefore constrained to have zero between district income segregation. to investigate how one district counties might influence the results, we estimate an addi tional model that specifies between school district income segregation as a set of indi cators that identify the quartile of county level income segregation in the distribution of all counties with nonzero income segrega tion. counties with zero income segregation form the reference group in these analyses. the results show that the first quartile of income segregation does not have a statisti cally significant association with attitudes about mixed income schools compared to zero income segregation. this indicates that there is not a sharp difference in the residen tial experience of zero and low segregation county contexts.
17 finally, we have estimated our preferred models among the subset of respondents who live in counties with nonzero income segregation and the main results are substantively unchanged. these results support the general conclusions of our analyses, that there is a negative associa tion between school district income segrega tion and attitudes about income integration in schools, and that the results are not driven by single school district counties. the results of these analyses are available from the authors upon request.
discussion and conclusion income segregation contributes to the uneven distribution of familial and public resources across socially and politically defined geographic spaces and ultimately limits upward economic mobility across generations . in addition to its potential effects on individuals economic and educational tra jectories, income segregation may also influ ence the way people perceive social inequality because it limits their exposure to the full distri bution of economic well being among mem bers of society. prior research on how local economic conditions influence attitudes and beliefs has focused on broad perceptions of economic inequality and well being. although beliefs about national economic issues, such as income inequality and unemployment, may be influenced by the economic conditions in one s proximate geographic context, these types of issues tend to have national policy prescrip tions, such as changes to the federal tax code or trade regulations. in this article, we focus on attitudes about the k 12 education system, a key public good that is closely tied to residen tial location. local school district boundaries, and the educational contexts they create, are a key mechanism that brokers access to educa tional resources and interpersonal contact. income segregation in schools can only be mitigated by changing features and actions of local communities, and thus, local economic conditions may be particularly salient for indi viduals beliefs about the sociodemographic composition of schools and the value of social integration in educational environments. more over, the influence of local conditions on indi viduals may vary depending on the scale and boundaries of the contextual space. residential neighborhoods, as measured by census tracts, generally represent narrowly proximate geo graphic spaces with cognitively fuzzy borders. these spaces often support informal and unplanned interactions among neighbors, and are more likely than larger geographic units to be socially homogenous. institutional boundaries, such as municipalities or school districts, create sharp distinctions in place based identity and confer access to specific public resources. institutional boundaries convey contextual information by facilitating interactions across larger geographic spaces and communicating bischoff and sandusky 19 information to the public to fulfill their function. therefore, these boundaries may influ ence how individuals define their local communities and conceive of the set of people who are meant to share public resources, such as schools.
consistent with our hypothesis, our results  show that residents of counties with greater between school district income segregation are less likely to indicate that income integra tion among students in schools is important, net of individual characteristics such as partisanship, ideology, household income, race ethnicity, and gender. this finding extends knowledge about the relationship between segregated communities and attitudes about social integration and lends support to the broader conclusion that economic context influences attitude formation. however, our results also show that micro level income segregation between neighborhoods has no statistically significant asso ciation with beliefs about the importance of income integration in schools. although we had no firm a priori hypothesis regarding the differential influence of micro level and meso level segregation, these results suggest that the degree to which residents support mixed income schools is associated with the relative homogeneity of the school district boundaries in which people live whereas the relative homogeneity of neighborhoods appears to be less salient. more generally, residential contexts refracted through relevant institutional boundaries may be particularly salient for opinions about social inequality in those institutional settings. furthermore, the results show that relative economic homo geneity within school district boundaries has a greater negative association with beliefs about the importance of integrated schools among parents with children in school. this corroborates theoretical perspectives that sug gest that the salience of community borders is related to the functionality of those borders for each individual, and it raises important questions about future support for social inte gration in schools in an era of rising income segregation among families with children.
the lack of existing empirical evidence  linking geographic context to beliefs and atti tudes is due, in part, to methodological chal lenges in this area of research. geocoded attitudinal survey data are relatively rare, and in cases where they do exist, researchers are often limited in their analytic approach due to small sample sizes in the geographic unit of analysis. although this analysis uses nation ally representative data to extend knowledge of contextual effects, the data present a cross sectional view of the relationship between income segregation and attitudes about inte gration, and therefore may represent, in part, a sorting effect. individuals who do not think income integration is important may choose to live in more income segregated counties. nevertheless, this research shows a consist ent negative relationship between several specifications of income segregation between school districts and attitudes about the perceived importance of income integration in schools, providing a foundation upon which to build additional evidence. future research might use more varied measures of atti tudes about economic integration in schools to strengthen the validity of these findings, especially because questions about racial and economic equity may be susceptible to social desirability bias. in addition, future studies might aim to more precisely investigate the mechanisms through which this association operates, including more precise measures of information gleaned from local media, or from geographically defined virtual com munities, such as neighborhood based online parenting groups. another possibility is that people are generally satisfied, or at least accustomed, to their residential communities, and thus express attitudes that simply align with and reflect those conditions.
income integration in schools may be a  key route to reducing educational inequalities because it reduces the differences in finan cial and familial resources across schools and school districts and broadens students expo sure to people from a wider range of economic 20 city community 00 backgrounds. interpersonal contact between  children from different economic back grounds may pay academic and labor market dividends, but it may also influence the development of children s own beliefs about economic inequality. understanding how resi dential, social, and institutional contexts influ ence attitudes is crucial to fully understanding the varied pathways through which segregated environments maintain inequality.
t able a1. predicted values using tract segregation how important is it that children attend school  with students from a wide range of economic backgrounds .
response categorytract segregation below  weighted national mediantract segregation above  weighted national medianmarginal  change p value not important at all 0.101 0.095 0.006 .631   somewhat important 0.189 0.182 0.007 .634   important 0.166 0.163 0.003 .639   very important 0.278 0.281 0.003 .632   extremely important 0.266 0.278 0.012 .634   note. clustered standard errors in parenthesis. estimated from ordered logistic regression models with all covariates  as observed. the population weighted, median value of tract level income segregation in all u.s. counties is 7.65.
t able a2. predicted values using school district segregation how important is it that children  attend school with students from a wide range of economic backgrounds .
response categoryschool district segregation  below weighted national  medianschool district  segregation above  weighted national medianmarginal  change p value not important at all 0.084 0.118 0.034 .004   somewhat important 0.167 0.207 0.039 .004   important 0.157 0.171 0.014 .004   very important 0.285 0.268 0.016 .007   extremely important 0.307 0.236 0.071 .003   note. clustered standard errors in parenthesis. estimated from ordered logistic regression models with all covariates as observed. the population weighted, median value of school district income segregation in all u.s. counties is 1.49.appendixbischoff and sandusky 21 t able a3. predicted values using school district segregation how important is it that children  attend school with students from a wide range of economic backgrounds .
response categoryschool district segregation  below weighted national  medianschool district segregation  above weighted national  medianmarginal  change p value not important at all 0.073 0.127 0.054 .009   somewhat important 0.149 0.212 0.063 .008   important 0.146 0.170 0.023 .015   very important 0.289 0.265 0.024 .022   extremely important 0.342 0.227 0.116 .006   note. clustered standard errors in parenthesis. estimated from ordered logistic regression models with all covariates as observed. the  population weighted, median value of school district income segregation in all u.s. counties is 1.49 .
t able a4. marginal changes .
how important is it that children  attend school with students from a wide range of economic  backgrounds school district income  segregationsquare root of school district  income segregation marginal change  one sd p valuemarginal change  one sd p value not important at all 0.011 .097 0.014 .029 somewhat important 0.012 .083 0.016 .020 important 0.004 .590 0.005 .011 very important 0.006 .125 0.008 .046 extremely important 0.021 .072 0.027 .015 note. estimated from ordered logistic regression models with all covariates as observed. the standard deviation of  national, population weighted, school district level income segregation is 2.39. the standard deviation of the square root of national, population weighted, school district level income segregation is 0.93.
t able a5. marginal changes .
how important is it that  children attend school with students from a wide range  of economic backgrounds school district income  segregationsquare root of school district  income segregation marginal change  one sd p valuemarginal change  one sd p value not important at all 0.024 .027 0.026 .022 somewhat important 0.025 .020 0.028 .014 important 0.008 .014 0.008 .010 very important 0.013 .053 0.014 .043 extremely important 0.044 .011 0.048 .007 note. estimated from ordered logistic regression models with all covariates as observed. the standard deviation of  national, population weighted, school district level income segregation is 2.39. the standard deviation of the square root of national, population weighted, school district level income segregation is 0.93.22 city community 00 t able a6. marginal changes .
how important is it that  children attend school with students from a wide range of  economic backgrounds tract income segregationsquare root of tract income  segregation marginal change  one sd p valuemarginal change  one sd p value not important at all 0.007 .297 0.008 .234 somewhat important 0.008 .280 0.010 .216 important 0.003 .249 0.003 .184 very important 0.004 .323 0.004 .262 extremely important 0.015 .270 0.017 .205 note. estimated from ordered logistic regression models with all covariates as observed. the standard deviation of  national, population weighted, tract level income segregation is 3.65. the standard deviation of the square root of national, population weighted, tract level income segregation is 0.80.
acknowledgments we thank the editors and four anonymous reviewers for  their constructive comments.
funding the author disclosed receipt of the following financial support for research, authorship, and or publication of this article this research was funded by the cornell survey research institute and the cornell center for social sciences.
notes  1. our questions were included in the 2016 cornell national social survey. the survey was admin istered by phone to a sample of landlines and cell phones drawn from a random digit dial list, which ensures that every household with a phone has an equal chance of being contacted. all interviews were conducted using computer assisted tele phone interview software. the national sample was conducted in english. the cooperation rate among those reached and deemed eligible to participate was 69 percent.
 2. exact survey question studies show that families are more residentially separated by income now than they were 40 years ago. in your opinion, how important is it that children attend school with stu dents from a wide range of economic backgrounds   3. before the final data were collected, the question was piloted by the survey research institute at cornell university. the staff collected feedback on how well respondents understood the question and then provided suggested revisions to the original ques tion wording to improve data quality.
 4. when thinking about income integration in schools, we expect that people will refer to areas larger than their specific neighborhood or school district, but rarely beyond what would be reasonable for a child to travel. in boston, for example, one way student bus rides are 23 minutes, on average , and new york state recommends children spend no more than one hour traveling to or from school .
 5. there are 81 cases in which the county of residence could not be determined from the residential zip code question, either because the respondent did not answer the question or provided an invalid zip code. however, we recover 32 of these missing county identifiers by using respondents area code for those who were reached on a landline, for a total of 49 cases with missing county identifiers. results are substantively similar with or without the 32 observations we recover using area codes.
 6. estimates suggest that using cell phone numbers to identify county of residence is accurate in about 60 percent of cases. cell phone numbers are a better indicator of place of residence for older respondents .
 7. of the respondents from the national sample who reported a valid zip code of residence , 70  percent live in a zip code that is completely nested in one county. of the remaining respondents who live in a zip code that spans more than one county, the county with the highest proportion of residential overlap contains 89 percent of the population, on average. this indicates little risk of misidentifying the county of residence using this method.
 8. census tracts are administrative subdivisions of counties that have an average population of 4,000 people, and a range of 1,200 to 8,000 people. school districts are geographic entities within which educa tional services are provided. school districts are not always perfectly nested within counties. we assign each school district to the county in which its central office is located as indicated in the national center for education statistics common core of data.bischoff and sandusky 23  9. in states with overlapping elementary and high  school districts, we drop high school districts to prevent double counting residential populations covered by more than one district.
10. we use the stata program rankseg to compute bias corrected income segregation measures.
11. tract boundaries also vary because of differences in population density. the distribution of land area for tracts in the united states has a median of 1.9 square miles and an interquartile range of 0.68 to 12.8 square miles .
12. there is very little difference across fit statistics for models using between tract segregation, though the square root measure produces a marginally better fit. among models using between school district income segregation, fit statistics clearly support the dichotomized measure.
13. we perform omnibus tests of the proportional odds assumption using the omodel stata package. the full models using tract and school district segregation pass this test. we also perform brant tests using the spost stata package to test the proportional odds assumption for each variable in each model. median household income and poverty rate violate the assumption in both models, and age also violates the assumption in the school district segregation model only.
14. although individual respondents are nested within counties, we do not present estimates from multi level models because the data are geographically sparse. there are less than two observations per county, on average, in the dataset. however, results from models with random intercepts for counties are nearly identical.
15. we originally controlled for income inequality and total population, but these variables had no significant association with our outcomes net of the other variables in the model, and they did not improve the fit of the model.
16. the characteristics of the analytic sample are largely comparable to nationally representative statistics on similar measures using the ameri can community survey and gen eral social survey . however, compared to national averages, the analytic sample has a higher proportion of white non hispanic respon dents and college graduates and a smaller share of low income individuals.
17. postestimation analyses also show that there is no statistically significant difference between coeffi cients for the first and second quartiles and that the first and second quartiles are not jointly signifi cantly different from the coefficient for zero seg regation. the third and fourth quartiles are jointly statistically significantly different from the coef ficient for zero segregation.references allport, gordon w. 1954. the nature of prejudice. cambridge, ma addison wesley.
baldassarri, delia, and maria abascal. 2020. diversity  and prosocial behavior. science 369 1183 87.
bertsimas, dimitris, arthur delarue, and sebastien martin. 2019. optimizing schools start time and bus routes. proceedings of the national academy of sciences of the united states of america 116 5943 48.
bischoff, kendra, and ann owens. 2019. the segregation of opportunity social and financial resources in the educational contexts of and higher income children, 1990 2014. demography 56 1635 64.
bischoff, kendra, and sean reardon. 2012. no middle ground. boston review, may june. retrieved august 8, 2023 .
bischoff, kendra, and laura tach. 2020. school choice,  neighborhood change, and racial imbalance  between public elementary schools and surrounding neighborhoods. sociological science 7 75 99.
black, sandra. 1999. do better schools matter parental valuation of elementary education. the quarterly journal of economics 114 577 99.
bobo, lawrence. 1991. social responsibility, individualism, and redistributive policies. sociological forum 6 71 92.
boser, ulrich, and perpetual baffour. 2017. isolated and  segregated a new look at the income divide in our nation s schooling system. washington, dc center for american progress.
chetty, raj, nathaniel hendren, patrick kline, and  emmanuel saez. 2014. where is the land of opportunity the geography of intergenerational mobility in the united states. the quarterly journal of eco nomics 129 1553 1623.
christian, leah, michael dimock, and scott keeter.  2009. accurately locating where wireless respon dents live requires more than a phone number. pew research center washington, dc. retrieved september 15, 2022 .
fiel, jeremy e., and yongjun zhang. 2018. three  dimensions of change in school segregation a  grade period analysis. demography 55 33 58.
franko, william, caroline j. tolbert, and christopher  witko. 2013. inequality, self interest, and public support for robin hood tax policies. political  research quarterly 66 923 37.
gilens, martin. 1995. racial attitudes and opposition to  welfare. the journal of politics 57 994 1014.
grannis, rick. 2009. from the ground up translating  geography into community through neighbor net works. princeton, nj princeton university press.24 city community 00 hunt, matthew o. 1996. the individual, society, or  both a comparison of black, latino, and white  beliefs about the causes of poverty. social forces 75 293 322.
hunt, matthew o. 2004. race ethnicity and beliefs  about wealth and poverty. social science quarterly 85 827.
hunter, albert. 1975. symbolic communities the persistence and change of chicago s local communities. chicago, il the university of chicago press.
jones, janelle, john schmitt, and valerie wilson. 2018.   50 years after the kerner commission african americans are better off in many ways but are still disadvantaged by racial inequality. economic policy institute report, washington, dc.
kaplan, david h., and steven r. holloway. 2001. scaling ethnic segregation causal processes and con tingent outcomes in chinese residential patterns. geojournal 53 59 70.
key, v . o. 1949. southern politics in state and nation.  1st ed. new york alfred a. knopf.
mcclendon, mckee j. 1985. racism, rational choice,  and white opposition to racial change a case study of busing. public opinion quarterly 49 214 33.
mcconahay, john b. 1982. self interest versus racial  attitudes as correlates of anti busing attitudes in louisville is it the buses or the blacks the journal of politics 44 692 720.
mcpherson, miller, lynn smith lovin, and james m.  cook. 2001. birds of a feather homophily in social networks. annual review of sociology 27 415 44.
mijs, jonathan j. b. 2018. inequality is a problem of  interference how people solve the social puzzle of unequal outcomes. societies 8 64.
minkoff, scott l., and jeffrey lyons. 2019. living with  inequality neighborhood income diversity and perceptions of the income gap. american politics research 47 329 61.
moody, james. 2001. race, school integration, and  friendship segregation in america. american journal of sociology 107 679 716.
neal, zachary p. 2013. the connected city how networks are shaping the modern metropolis. new york routledge.
newman, benjamin j., christopher d. johnson, and patrick l. lown. 2015. false consciousness or class awareness local income inequality, personal eco nomic position, and belief in american meritocracy. american journal of political science 59 326 40.
newman, benjamin j., yamil velez, todd k. hartman,  and alexa bankert. 2015. are citizens receiving the treatment assessing a key link in contextual theories of public opinion and political behavior. political psychology 36 123 31.
oliver, j. eric, and tali mendelberg. 2000. reconsidering the environmental determinants of white racial attitudes. american journal of political science  44 574 89.owens, ann. 2016. inequality in children s contexts  the economic segregation of households with and without children. american sociological review 81 549 74.
owens, ann. 2018. income segregation between school  districts and inequality in students achievement. sociology of education 91 1 27.
owens, ann, sean f. reardon, and christopher jencks.  2016. income segregation between schools and school districts. american educational research journal 53 1159 97.
pettigrew, thomas f. 1998. intergroup contact theory.  annual review of psychology 49 65 85.
pettigrew, thomas f., linda r. tropp, ulrich wagner,  and oliver christ. 2011. recent advances in intergroup contact theory. international journal of  intercultural relations 35 271 80.
reardon, sean f. 2011a. measures of income segregation. cepa working papers, stanford center for education policy analysis, stanford, ca. retrieved september 15, 2022 .
reardon, sean f. 2011b. the widening academic  achievement gap between the rich and the poor new evidence and possible explanations. pp. 91 116 in whither opportunity rising inequality and the uncertain life chances of low income children, edited by r. murnane, and g. duncan. new york russell sage foundation.
reardon, sean f., and kendra bischoff. 2011. income  inequality and income segregation. american journal of sociology 116 1092 1153.
reardon, sean f., and kendra bischoff. 2019. no  neighborhood is an island. pp. 56 59 in the dream revisited contemporary debates about housing, segregation, and opportunity, edited by i. g. ellen, and j. p. steil. new york columbia university press.
reardon, sean f., kendra bischoff, ann owens, and  joseph b. townsend. 2018. has income segrega tion really increased bias and bias correction in sample based segregation estimates. demography 55 2129 60.
reardon, sean f., grewal elena, kalogrides demetra,  and greenberg erica. 2012. brown fades the end of court ordered school desegregation and the resegregation of american public schools. journal of policy analysis and management 31 876 904.
reardon, sean f., stephen matthews, david o sullivan,  barry lee, glenn firebaugh, chad farrell, and kendra bischoff. 2008. the geographic scale of metropolitan racial segregation. demography  45 489 514.
reardon, sean f., and ann owens. 2014. sixty years  after brown trends and consequences of school seg regation. annual review of sociology 40 199 218.
reeves, andrew, and james g. gimpel. 2012. ecologies  of unease geographic context and national eco nomic evaluations. political behavior 34 507 34.bischoff and sandusky 25 rossell, christine h. 1990. the carrot or the stick for school  desegregation policy magnet schools or forced busing. philadelphia, pa temple university press.
sampson, robert j., jeffrey d. morenoff, and thomas  gannon rowley. 2002. assessing neighborhood effects social processes and new directions in research. annual review of sociology 28 443 78.
sands, melissa l. 2017. exposure to inequality affects  support for redistribution. proceedings of the  national academy of sciences of the united states of america 114 663 68.
sharkey, patrick, and jacob w. faber. 2014. where,  when, why, and for whom do residential contexts matter moving away from the dichotomous understanding of neighborhood effects. annual review of sociology 40 559 79.
smith, tom w. michael davern, jeremy freese, and  stephen morgan. 2018. general social surveys, 1972 2018. chicago, il norc at the university of chicago. retrieved september 15, 2022 .
thal, adam. 2017. class isolation and affluent americans perception of social conditions. political behavior 39 401 24.
the 49th annual pdk poll of the public s attitudes  toward the public schools. 2017. phi delta kappan 99 np1 32.
weatherford, m. stephen. 1980. the politics of school  busing contextual effects and community polariza tion. the journal of politics 42 747 65.
weiher, gregory r. 1991. the fractured metropolis  political fragmentation and metropolitan segrega tion. albany, ny state university of new york press.
xu, ping, and james c. garand. 2010. economic context and americans perceptions of income inequal ity. social science quarterly 91 1220 41.