income inequality and income segregation author sean f. reardon and kendra bischoff source american journal of sociology, vol. 116, no. 4 , pp. 1092 1153  published by the university of chicago press stable url http www.jstor.org stable 10.1086 657114 .
accessed 29 09 2013 05 29 your use of the jstor archive indicates your acceptance of the terms conditions of use, available at .
http www.jstor.org page info about policies terms.jsp  .
jstor is a not for profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. we use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. for more information about jstor, please contact support jstor.org.
 .
the university of chicago press is collaborating with jstor to digitize, preserve and extend access to american journal of sociology.
http www.jstor.org  this content downloaded from 155.247.167.222 on sun, 29 sep 2013 05 29 03 am all use subject to jstor terms and conditions1092 ajs volume 116 number 4 1092 1153 h170152011 by the university of chicago. all rights reserved.
0002 9602 2011 11604 0002 10.00income inequality and income segregation1 sean f . reardon and kendra bischoff stanford university this article investigates how the growth in income inequality from 1970 to 2000 affected patterns of income segregation along threedimensions the spatial segregation of poverty and af uence, race speci c patterns of income segregation, and the geographic scale ofincome segregation. the evidence reveals a robust relationship be tween income inequality and income segregation, an effect that islarger for black families than for white families. in addition, incomeinequality affects income segregation primarily through its effect onthe large scale spatial segregation of af uence rather than by af fecting the spatial segregation of poverty or by altering small scalepatterns of income segregation.
introduction after decades of decline, income inequality in the united states has grown substantially in the last four decades. the national gini coef cient ofhousehold income inequality, for example, rose from .394 in 1970 to .403,.428, and .462 in 1980, 1990, and 2000, respectively.
2at the same time, income segregation has grown as well , though the details of how 1an earlier version of this article was presented at the annual meeting of the american sociological association and the meeting of the internationalsociological association research committee on social strati cation and mobility. we thank participants in the university ofchicago s sociology workshop for helpful feedback. we thank steve graham andyosef bodovski for programming assistance. research for this article was supportedby the national science foundation and the william t . grant foundation . directcorrespondence to sean f . reardon, school of education, stanford university, 520galvez mall, stanford, california 94305. e mail sean.reardon stanford.edu 2see http www.census.gov hhes www income data historical household index.html, table h 4.
this content downloaded from 155.247.167.222 on sun, 29 sep 2013 05 29 03 am all use subject to jstor terms and conditionsincome inequality and income segregation 1093and why income segregation has grown have been much less thoroughly investigated than they have been for income inequality. common senseand empirical evidence suggest that these trends are linked greater in equality in incomes implies greater inequality in the housing and neigh borhood quality that families or individuals can afford but it is lessclear in what speci c ways income inequality affects income segregation.
income segregation by which we mean the uneven geographic distribution of income groups within a certain area is a complex, multi dimensional phenomenon.
3in particular, income segregation may be characterized by the spatial segregation of poverty and or the spatial segregation of af uence . in addition, income segregation may occur at dif ferent geographic scales. high and low income households may be spa tially far from one another or may be in economically homogeneousneighborhoods that are spatially near one another .and given the strong correlation between income and race in the unitedstates, income segregation is often empirically entangled with racial seg regation, implying the necessity of examining income segregation sepa rately by race as well as for the population as a whole.
income segregation and its causes and trends is of interest to sociologists because it may lead to inequality in social outcomes. incomesegregation implies, by de nition, that lower income households will live,on average, in neighborhoods with lower average incomes than higher income households do. if the average income of one s neighbors indirectly affects one s own social, economic, or physicaloutcomes , then income segregation will lead tomore unequal outcomes between low and high income households thantheir differences in income alone would predict. in a highly segregatedregion, then, higher income households may be advantaged relative tolower income households not only by the difference in their own incomesbut by the differences in their respective neighbors incomes.
given the potential consequences of income segregation on social, po3throughout this article, we focus on the spatial evenness dimension of income segregation because this di mension maps most closely onto our theoretical model of how income inequality isrelated to residential household income distribution patterns. below we discuss therelationship of this dimension to patterns of concentration and exposure.
this content downloaded from 155.247.167.222 on sun, 29 sep 2013 05 29 03 am all use subject to jstor terms and conditionsamerican journal of sociology 1094litical, and health related outcomes, it is important to understand how it is produced. in this article, we seek to understand whether and howincome inequality leads to income segregation. more speci cally, we seekto understand if and how variation in income inequality including var iation in inequality among metropolitan areas, between racial groups, andover time has shaped patterns of income segregation in the years 1970  2000. despite the importance of understanding the connection between income inequality and income segregation, few studies have addressedthese questions .moreover, while these studies nd that increasing income inequality leadsto increasing income segregation, they donot investigate the ways in which income inequality is linked to incomesegregation in depth. as a result, these studies provide little or no infor mation about income inequality s effects on the segregation of povertyand or af uence, about racial differences in income segregation, or abouthow income inequality affects the spatial scale of income segregation.
the research presented here investigates these issues. first, we describe a set of trends in average metropolitan area income segregation from 1970to 2000, including overall trends, trends among white and black familiesseparately, trends in the segregation of poverty and af uence, and trendsin the geographic scale of segregation. we use a newly developed measureof rank order income segregation that avoids the confounding of changesin the income distribution with changes in income segregation. second,we estimate the effect of metropolitan area income inequality on overallmetropolitan area income segregation during this time period. third, weinvestigate in more detail how income inequality affects the geographicsegregation of poverty and af uence, the extent to which it affects incomesegregation among white and black families differently, and the ways inwhich it affects the geographic scale of income segregation.
background recent growth in income inequality in the united states t wentieth century u.s. income inequality is characterized by a shaped  trend . income inequalitywas high in the rst half of the century, reaching a peak in the late 1920s,when the top 10 of earners in the united states received 46 of allincome and the top 1 of earners received nearly 20 of all income. however, the great depression and world warii greatly depleted the share of income held by the highest earners andthus reduced income inequality substantially. by the end of world warii, the share of income received by the top 1 of earners was only 11 , this content downloaded from 155.247.167.222 on sun, 29 sep 2013 05 29 03 am all use subject to jstor terms and conditionsincome inequality and income segregation 1095and by 1970, this gure was below 8 , a 60 decline from its high in 1928. in the 1970s and 1980s, income inequality began to rise again. by2006, the share of income held by the top decile was 45 and the shareheld by the top 1 of earners was 18 , approaching inequality levelssimilar to the pre world war ii highs .
the growth in income inequality in the past four decades has been driven largely by the growth of upper tail inequality dispersion in therelative incomes of those in the upper half of the income distribution rather than by growth in lower tail inequality . this pattern is illustrated in gure1, which shows the changes in the household gini index , the 90 50 household income ratio, andthe 50 10 household income ratio. the 90 50 ratio was 30 larger in 2007than it was in 1967, whereas the 50 10 ratio was actually 6 7 smaller.this implies that the lower tail of the income distribution was compressedslightly whereas the upper tail wasstretched.
4moreover, the growth in the household gini index over the period very closely tracks the growth in the 90 50 ratio, indicating thatthe trend in the gini index was driven largely if not entirely by growthin upper tail inequality. piketty and saez argue that the notoriouslysharp increase in chief executive of cer pay evident in recent decades isindicative of a general shift from an elite rentier class in the beginningof the 20th century to an elite working rich class today, leading to theexceptional rise in inequality in the upper tail of the distribution.
5as we discuss below, this pattern of growth in income inequality has importantimplications for the effects of income inequality on income segregation.
4the trend in the 50 10 ratio we report here differs slightly than that reported by autor et al. , who nd that the 50 10 ratio grew in the 1970s and early1980s before attening in the late l980s and 1990s. the discrepancy may arise fromthe fact that they describe trends in individual level male and female wage inequality using current population survey data whereas g. 1 reports household income inequality. regardless, in both cases, the dominant factor in producing income inequalitygrowth in recent decades has been the growth of what they term upper tail inequality.  5a large body of research investigates the causes of the growth in income inequality in the united states since the 1970s. economists have focused on declining labor unionmembership, the declining real value of the minimum wage, and the ways in whichtechnological changes have differentially affected the productivity of workers . sociologists have investigated factors relating to changes in familystructure, marital homogamy, and female labor force participation . inthe interest of space, we do not review this literature here.
this content downloaded from 155.247.167.222 on sun, 29 sep 2013 05 29 03 am all use subject to jstor terms and conditionsfig. 1. trends in household income inequality, 1967 2007. the two solid lines show the trends in the ratio of household incomes at two percentiles of the income distribution. all trends are divided by their value in 1967 in order to put the trends on a common scale. source authors calculationsfrom http www.census.gov hhes www income histinc p60no231 tablea3.pdf.
this content downloaded from 155.247.167.222 on sun, 29 sep 2013 05 29 03 am all use subject to jstor terms and conditionsincome inequality and income segregation 1097dimensions of income segregation income segregation the uneven sorting of households or families among neighborhoods by income is relatively ubiquitous in the united states.6 anyone who has rented an apartment or bought a house understandsthat housing costs more in some neighborhoods than it does in others.except for those few with liquid wealth, income is a primary determinantof neighborhood affordability. moreover, housing prices are tightly linkedto the cost of nearby housing. realtors, appraisers, and home buyers userecent sale prices of comparable neighborhood real estate to gauge ap propriate sale prices for nearby properties, which leads to positive feed back in local housing markets. and because mortgage loans are tied toincome , home buyers neighborhoodoptions are constrained by their incomes. in principle, these mechanismsoperate to place a oor on the incomes of indi viduals who can afford to live in a given neighborhood, leading to acertain degree of residential sorting by income.
income segregation has multiple dimensions. first, neighborhood sorting of families or households by income may produce the segregation ofaf uence and or the segregation of poverty .
7consider a stylized population made up of 6throughout this article we are most interested theoretically in household income segregation because households are primary residential units and so are most relevant to a discussion of segregation.nonetheless, because of data limitations , we use family income in much ofour analysis. although family income is generally higher on average than householdincome because many households contain only one person, the trends in inequality forfamilies and households are very highly correlated the correlation is .997, according to moller, alderson,and nielsen . likewise, the shapes of the trends in metropolitan areafamily and household income segregation are similar as well .
7note that we mean to distinguish the terms segregation of poverty and segregation of af uence from the more commonly used terms concentrated poverty and con centrated af uence. the latter terms are often used to describe the income composition ofindividual neighborhoods rather thanpatterns of the distribution of income across multiple neighborhoods in a city or region.in addition, we intend to identify segregation of poverty and segregation of af uenceas aspects of the spatial evenness dimension of segregation rather than as descriptionsof the concentration dimension . under scenario 1, the low income families all live in a single neighborhood, with no middle or high income neighbors, whereas the middle and high income families areevenly distributed between the other two neighborhoods a situation inwhich the segregation of poverty is greater than the segregation of af u ence . under scenario 2,the situation is reversed the segregation of af uence is greater than thesegregation of poverty. and nally, in scenario 3, the segregation of bothpoverty and af uence is very high.
a second important dimension of income segregation is its relationship to patterns of racial segregation. given the correlation of race and incomein the united states and the high levels of racial segregation in manymetropolitan areas, racial segregation alone could produce a certain degreeof income segregation, even if there were no within race income segre gation at all. moreover, the factors that affect income segregation andthat link income inequality to income segregation may differ importantlyacross race ethnic groups. housing discrimination and residents prefer ences for same or different race neighbors, for example, may also affectresidential sorting. until relatively recently, black families neighborhoodoptions were severely constrained by various discriminatory housing prac tices ,and even now these processes have not been entirely eradicated . such practices meant that black and white familieswith identical incomes and assets, for example, had a very different setof residential options. this also likely meant that, historically, incomeinequality was not as tightly linked to income segregation for black fam ilies as it was for white families.
a third dimension of income segregation is its geographic scale . this refers to the extent to which the neighborhoodsorting of households by income results from large scale patterns of res idential sorting or from small scale patterns of residential sorting . the extent 2004 . we can have high levels of segregation of poverty without the spatial concentration of poor households within one area of a region .
this content downloaded from 155.247.167.222 on sun, 29 sep 2013 05 29 03 am all use subject to jstor terms and conditionsincome inequality and income segregation 1099table 1 stylized patterns of income segregation neighborhood abc scenario 1 segregation of poverty  lo w i n c o me .............................. 1 0 0 0 0mi d d l e i n c o me ........................... 0 5 0 5 0hi g h i n c o me ............................. 0 5 0 5 0 scenario 2 segregation of af uence  lo w i n c o me .............................. 5 0 5 0 0mi d d l e i n c o me ........................... 5 0 5 0 0hi g h i n c o me ............................. 0 0 1 0 0 scenario 3 segregation of poverty and af uence  lo w i n c o me .............................. 1 0 0 0 0mi d d l e i n c o me ........................... 0 1 0 0 0hi g h i n c o me ............................. 0 0 1 0 0 to which income segregation is characterized by large or small geographic scales may have implications for the consequences of income segregation. reardon and colleagues argue, for example, that micro scale res idential segregation patterns are likely to affect pedestrian contact patternsand may be more consequential for children and the elderly, who are oftenmore geographically constrained than young and middle aged adults.conversely, they argue, macro scale segregation patterns may be morelikely to affect the spatial distribution of economic, institutional, and po litical resources .
patterns and trends in income segregation most prior research on income segregation has focused on measuring overall income segregation and has attended little to either the geographicscale of income segregation or the extent to which it is characterized bythe segregation of poverty and or af uence. research on the trends inoverall household or family income segregation generally indicate thatmetropolitan area income segregation grew, on average, from 1970 to 2000,though studies differ on the details of the timing and magnitude of theincrease because of differences in the measures of income segregation usedand the sample of metropolitan areas included . in particular, income segregation appears to have grownmost sharply in the 1980s. by many measures, income segregation, andparticularly the segregation of poverty, declined in the 1990s . in addition, studies that examine trends in income segregation by race generally ndthat income segregation among black families or households grew fasterthan it did among white families or households, particularly during the1970s and 1980s . later in this article we discuss the short comings of many of the measures of income segregation used in priorliterature and present new evidence of trends in metropolitan area incomesegregation. we use a new measure of income segregation that addressesthese shortcomings.
potential consequences of income segregation there are many mechanisms through which income segregation might affect individual outcomes. the quality of public goods and local socialinstitutions is affected by a jurisdiction s tax base and by the involvementof the community in the maintenance and investment of these publicresources. if high income households cluster together within a small num ber of neighborhoods or municipalities, they may be able to collectivelybetter their own outcomes by pooling their extensive nancial and socialcapital to generate resources of which only they can take advantage. suchincome segregation may be self reinforcing low income communities areoften unable to generate enough social and human capital to overcomethe strong incentive for wealthy communities to isolate themselves, be cause in homogeneously high income communities, residents may be ableto capitalize on their ability to provide high quality public services at thelowest cost. higher income neighborhoods, therefore, may have moregreen space, better funded schools, better social services, or more of anynumber of other amenities that affect quality of life. in addition, high and low income neighborhoods may differ in their social processes, norms,and social environments . conversely, if high income households are not clustered to gether, then they may help to fund social services and institutions thatserve lower income populations. thus, the ability of high income house holds to self segregate affects the welfare of poor people and the neigh borhoods in which they reside. not only does this resource problem affectresidents current quality of life and opportunities, but it can also bridgegenerations the income distribution in a community may affect the in tergenerational transfer of occupational status through investment in lo cally nanced institutions that serve children, such as schools .
nonetheless, relatively little prior research has directly assessed the impacts of income segregation on individual outcomes. several studies this content downloaded from 155.247.167.222 on sun, 29 sep 2013 05 29 03 am all use subject to jstor terms and conditionsincome inequality and income segregation 1101show that income segregation within states or metropolitan areas is associated with greater inequality in educational attainment between poorand nonpoor individuals . likewise, mayerand sarin show that greater state level income segregation is as sociated with higher rates of infant mortality. a related body of research nds that metropolitan area racial segregation leads to greater racial in equality in labor market, educational, and health outcomes . because racial segregation implies some level of income segregation and because incomesegregation is one plausible mechanism through which racial segregationmay lead to racial inequality, the research showing that racial segregationincreases racial disparities is consistent with the hypothesis that incomesegregation may lead to inequality of outcomes. in addition to the rela tively small body of research directly investigating the effects of incomesegregation, a large body of recent research has attempted to investigateone potential mechanism through which segregation may affect individ uals the effect of living in a neighborhood with a high poverty rate. theempirical evidence for such neighborhood effects, however, remains bothmixed and contested .nonetheless, a recent review of the neighborhood effects literature concludes that residential context does indeed matter for at least one out come children s test scores albeit in somewhat complex ways theseneighborhood effects may be nonlinear with respect to baseline disadvantage and may depend on children s age and the level of communityviolence that is experienced by the child .in sum, while theoretical arguments suggest that income segregation likely produces inequality in social outcomes, empirical research has yet to conclusively demonstrate this or to con rm its mechanisms.
the relationship between income inequality and income segregation processes linking income inequality to income segregation despite the need for more and better research on the effects of income segregation, this article focuses on an equally important topic the causes of income segregation. speci cally, we investigate one potential cause income inequality. certainly income inequality is a necessary conditionfor income segregation. by de nition, if there were no income inequality, this content downloaded from 155.247.167.222 on sun, 29 sep 2013 05 29 03 am all use subject to jstor terms and conditionsamerican journal of sociology 1102there could be no income segregation because all individuals would have the same income and thus all neighborhoods would have the same incomedistribution. nonetheless, income inequality is not alone suf cient to cre ate income segregation. rather, income segregation also requires the pres ence of income correlated residential preferences, an income based hous ing market, and or housing policies that link income to residential location.
three kinds of income correlated residential preferences may lead to income segregation in the presence of income inequality preferences re garding the socioeconomic characteristics of one s neighbors, preferencesregarding characteristics of one s neighbors that are correlated with theirincome, and preferences regarding local public goods. if some or all house holds have preferences regarding the income level, educational attain ment, or occupational status of their neighbors , thenhouseholds with similar incomes will be more likely to be neighbors thanis expected by chance. likewise, residential preferences based on neigh borhood characteristics that are correlated with income may also produceincome segregation. one obvious example is race. if households selectneighborhoods on the basis of the racial composition of that neighborhoodand household income is correlated with race, then this would also pro duce income segregation, even in the absence of income speci c prefer ences.
preferences for public goods refer to the value households place on amenities that can be collectively purchased . households that value such public goodswill have incentives to live in communities with neighbors who both sharethese preferences and have high enough incomes to contribute to theircollective purchase . this can be seen as amanifestation of the tiebout model of residential sorting, in which resi dents choose to live in municipalities that most closely match their idealset of government services with their ability to pay . thetiebout model predicts income segregation because households with sim ilar preferences and ability to pay tend to form homogeneous communities.differences among communities in public goods, income related demo graphic characteristics, and other social and cultural amenities may alsolead to the development of neighborhood status hierarchies, or what onemight call neighborhood brands. the differentiation of communitiesalong a status dimension in turn raises demand for those neighborhoodswith the most desirable brands . thus, income differences may lead to the devel opment of a rough status hierarchy among residential locations this statushierarchy in turn may perpetuate income segregation by shaping house hold preferences.
this content downloaded from 155.247.167.222 on sun, 29 sep 2013 05 29 03 am all use subject to jstor terms and conditionsincome inequality and income segregation 1103even in the presence of sizable income inequality, however, the incomecorrelated preferences outlined above may be insuf cient to produce in come segregation. income segregation requires as well the existence of ahousing market based on residents ability to pay or housing policies thatsort households by income. for example, housing policies that constrainresidential options for low income households to public housing devel opments may directly affect the segregation of poverty by virtue of thespatial density and distribution of those options. more generally, incomesegregation results from a residential allocation or sorting process, which,in principle, is constrained by housing policy. under a housing policy thatallows sorting on the basis of preferences and ability to pay, residentialsegregation will likely be highly sensitive to changes in income inequalityand income related residential preferences because, in such a society,higher income households will be able to outbid lower income householdsfor access to preferred neighborhoods. in addition, when higher incomehouseholds have greater in uence than lower income households overlocal political processes, they may have the capacity to create housingpolicies that perpetuate segregation by income, such as zoning laws thatprohibit multifamily housing or require minimum lot sizes to build newstructures.
income inequality and the segregation of poverty and af uence the above arguments suggest that, given the nature of the housing market, income inequality and income segregation are linked. nonetheless, it isnot clear if or how changes in income inequality might affect differentaspects of income segregation, including the segregation of poverty andaf uence. in order to build intuition about how income inequality mayrelate to income segregation, it is useful to consider how differences inincome inequality are related to differences in income distributions. figure2 provides a stylized representation of two income distributions with equalaggregate incomes but that differ in their level of inequality. the solidlines describe the income distribution under a relatively low level of in equality , and the dashed linesdescribe the income distribution under a relatively high level of inequality.
8moreover, the stylized income 8the average level of income inequality across the 100 largest metropolitan areas in the years 1970 2000, as measured by the gini index, was 0.37, with an sd of 0.03, so gini indices of 0.34 and 0.40 correspond to metro politan areas 1 sd above and below the mean level of inequality in the period 1970  2000. likewise, the average metropolitan area saw an increase in the gini index from 0.35 to 0.40 from 1970 to 2000, so these distributions also correspond roughly to themagnitude of the average change over this period.
this content downloaded from 155.247.167.222 on sun, 29 sep 2013 05 29 03 am all use subject to jstor terms and conditionsfig. 2. comparison of stylized income distributions this content downloaded from 155.247.167.222 on sun, 29 sep 2013 05 29 03 am all use subject to jstor terms and conditionsincome inequality and income segregation 1105distributions depicted here differ only in the level of upper tail inequality  the 50 10 income ratio is identical in both cases, but the 90 50 incomeratio is 35 larger in the high inequality case than in the low inequalitycase.
9note that the income distributions described in gure 2 are not based on actual data. rather they are stylized distributions that exemplifytypical differences in income distributions an exercise that highlightshow the type and magnitude of inequality relate to important features ofincome distributions.
the left hand panel of gure 2 shows that the income distribution is more spread out at the high end under conditions of greater inequality.there is greater variation in income among high earners in the higher inequality distribution than in the lower inequality distribution. at thelow end of the income distribution, however, increasing inequality actuallycompresses the income distribution, a result of the fact that income must be nonnegative .
10 the difference in the effect of income inequality at the high and low ends of the income distributions is evident in the middle panel of gure2. for example, it is instructive to compare the incomes of households atthe 20th and 30th percentiles in each scenario. in the lower inequalitydistribution , the household at the 20th percentile has an incomeof 33,500 and the household at the 30th percentile has an income of 43,000, a difference of 9,500 and a ratio of 1.28. in the higher inequalitydistribution , the 20th and 30th percentile households haveincomes of 29,000 and 37,000, respectively, a difference of 8,000 anda ratio of 1.28. that is, under high inequality, low to moderate incomehouseholds of a given distance apart in income ranks have incomes thatare actually closer together than under low inequality. this implies that increases inincome inequality of the type depicted here will not increase and may actuallydecrease income segregation among low income households . the reason is that increasing inequality makes the incomes of low income households more similar to oneanother.
the opposite is true at the high end of the income distribution. when the incomes of the 70th and 80th percentile households under both thehigher and lower inequality distributions are compared, it is apparent 9because most of the change in income inequality from 1970 to 2000 was the result of changes in upper tail inequality, we are particularly interested in investigating theeffect of such changes on segregation patterns.
10while income can be negative, the number of households reporting negative income is generally quite small and has little effect on the income distribution.
this content downloaded from 155.247.167.222 on sun, 29 sep 2013 05 29 03 am all use subject to jstor terms and conditionsamerican journal of sociology 1106that an increase in income inequality increases the difference in incomes between these households. in the lower inequality distribution, the house hold at the 70th percentile has an income of 88,000 and the householdat the 80th percentile has an income of 106,000, a difference of 18,000and a ratio of 1.20. in the higher income distribution, the 70th and 80th percentile households have incomes of 83,000 and 109,000, respectively,a difference of 26,000 and a ratio of 1.31. that is, an increase in upper tail income inequality increases the difference in incomes between twomoderate to high income households at given percentiles of the incomedistribution, making it less likely that they can afford to live in the sameneighborhood. this implies that differences in income inequality that aredue to differences in upper tail inequality as has been the case withchanges in income inequality from 1970 to 2000 should lead to greatersegregation of af uence but not necessarily to greater segregation of pov erty.
racial differences in the effects of income inequality as we suggested above, income inequality may affect income segregation differently among black and white households because of the variationin housing markets available to each group. racial discrimination in thehousing market has meant that, historically at least, minority households have had fewer residential options thanwhite households with similar income and wealth. even if black house holds had the same preferences and the same level of income inequalityas white households, the racially discriminatory aspects of the housingmarket likely led to lower levels of income segregation among black house holds than among white households. the reason is that the segregationof black households compelled higher and lower income black householdsto live close to one another.
the black middle class grew rapidly from 1940 to 1990, 11resulting in rising income inequality among black households . until the passage of the fair housing actin 1968 and the home mortgage disclosure act in 1975, however, dis criminatory housing practices severely limited the residential mobility ofmiddle class black families . as a result, prior to1970, income inequality among blacks was probably less tightly linkedto income segregation than it was for whites. in the period from 1970 to2000, however, the housing options available to middle class blacks 11farley and frey de ne middle class as having an income that is twice the poverty line. by this de nition, just 1 of black households in 1940 were middle class,compared to 39 in 1970 and 47 in 1990.
this content downloaded from 155.247.167.222 on sun, 29 sep 2013 05 29 03 am all use subject to jstor terms and conditionsincome inequality and income segregation 1107greatly expanded , likely tightening the link between inequality and segregation amongblacks over this period.
empirical predictions the above arguments suggest several testable hypotheses. first, because the u.s. housing market is largely based on ability to pay, we predict thatincome inequality will be positively correlated with income segregationand that changes in income inequality with be positively associated withchanges in income segregation. second, because most of the change inincome inequality has been the result of growth in upper tail inequality,we predict that changes in income inequality will affect the segregationof af uence to a greater degree than it affects the segregation of poverty.third, we predict that income inequality will have a stronger relationshipwith income segregation among black families than among white familiesduring the period 1970 2000, when housing market constraints were sub stantially reduced for black households. finally, although there is no ex isting research on the geographic scale of income segregation, we expectthat income inequality leads to income segregation primarily by increasingthe spatial distance between high and low income households . thus, wepredict that income inequality will have a stronger relationship withmacro scale segregation patterns than with micro scale segregation pat terns.
there is little prior research regarding most of these hypotheses. several existing studies demonstrate a positive association between income in equality and income segregation. mayer shows that the welldocumented increase in income inequality from 1970 to 1990 resulted inan increase in segregation between census tracts within states althoughthe income variance within census tracts remained stable, the incomevariance between tracts grew, indicating an increase in between tractincome segregation. wheeler and la jeunesse largely corroboratethese ndings using metropolitan areas, rather than states, as the unit ofanalysis. they nd that the average level of income segregation within metro politan areas grew sharply in the 1980s and declined slightly in the 1990s,a pattern that is only partly consistent with the trend in steadily risingincome inequality over the same period. because their analysis is basedon a simple comparison of trends, however, it indicates little about thecausal relationship between income inequality and segregation.
a third recent study uses metropolitan area xed effects regression modthis content downloaded from 155.247.167.222 on sun, 29 sep 2013 05 29 03 am all use subject to jstor terms and conditionsamerican journal of sociology 1108els to estimate the causal effect of metropolitan area income inequality on income segregation, demonstrating that income inequality has a strongeffect on income segregation . speci cally, watson nds thata 1 sd rise in income inequality leads to a 0.4 0.9 sd rise in incomesegregation. moreover, watson brie y investigates several additional as pects of the relationship between income inequality and income segre gation. first, she nds that income inequality leads to increases in thesegregation of both poverty and af uence . second, she nds that incomeinequality has a weaker effect on income segregation among black familiesthan in the population as a whole .finally, her results suggest no effect of income inequality on suburbani zation rates from 1970 to 2000, implying, perhaps, that income inequalitydoes not affect the geographic scale of income segregation . none theless, while each of these three analyses provides some evidence re garding our hypotheses, they each rely on segregation measures that arenot ideal. as we describe below, her preferred measure of segregation, thecentile gap index, does not allow clear comparisons across metro areasand years and it cannot be used to measure geographic scale. in ouranalyses below, we use a more appropriate measure of income segregationthat allows us to more directly estimate the effects of inequality on thesegregation of af uence and poverty and on the geographic scale of seg regation.
data and methods measuring income segregation to analyze income segregation it is necessary to rst measure income segregation. while there is a rich literature discussing measures of seg regation among unordered categorical groups, such as race or gender , 12methods of measuring income segregation are much less well developed. unlike race or gender, income is measured on a continuous scale, so measures of segregation that are appro priate for unordered categorical groups are not appropriate for measuringincome segregation. we provide here a brief review of existing approaches 12there is also a literature in geography and economics on the measurement of categorical segregation .
this content downloaded from 155.247.167.222 on sun, 29 sep 2013 05 29 03 am all use subject to jstor terms and conditionsincome inequality and income segregation 1109to measuring income segregation and then describe the measure we will rely on, the rank order information theory index .
much of the small body of existing literature on income segregation in sociology has measured income segregation by using established measuresof racial segregation, such as the dissimilarity index, applied to a smallset of crude income categories . examples of this approach are found in the literature insociology , urban planning , economics , and public health . there are a number of serious de ciencies with this technique, including the substantial lossof information that results from treating income as categorical and thearbitrary nature of selecting a small number of cut points to categorizethe data. even if the exact income of families is unknown, the 16 incomecategories reported in the 2000 u.s. census, for example, contain far moreinformation than two or even four categories. moreover, the income cat egories changeover time, so that categories de ned in one decennial census cannot bereplicated in another.
a second approach to measuring income segregation de nes segregation as a ratio of the between neighborhood variation in mean income to thetotal population variation in income. income segregation measures de rived from this approach have used a number of different measures ofincome variation, including the variance of incomes , the standard deviation ofincomes , the variance of logged incomes , the coef cient of variation of incomes , and bourguignon s income inequality index . similarly, the centile gap index measures segregationas one minus the ratio of within neighborhood variation in income per centile ranks to the overall variation in percentile ranks . most well known in sociology is jargowsky s neigh borhood sorting index , which is de ned as the square root of theratio of the between unit income variance to the total income variance.
although the nsi and measures like it improve on categorical measures of income segregation because they do not rely on arbitrary and changingdichotomizations of income distributions, they lack a key feature that isnecessary for our purposes in this article. in order to distinguish incomesegregation from income inequality , a measure of income seg regation is required that is independent of income inequality. one way this content downloaded from 155.247.167.222 on sun, 29 sep 2013 05 29 03 am all use subject to jstor terms and conditionsamerican journal of sociology 1110to achieve this is to use an income segregation measure that relies only on information about the rank ordering of incomes among families ratherthan information about actual dollar income amounts. a rank order in come segregation measure will be, by de nition, invariant under anychanges in income that leave families residential location and incomerank unchanged, regardless of how income inequality changes. unfor tunately, the nsi does not satisfy this property and somay confound changes in income inequality with changes in residentialsorting by income and may confound differences in income distributionsacross time, place, and groups with differences in segregation . more suitable for our purposes is the rank order information theory index , which measures the rh ratio of within unit income rank variation to overall income rank variation.
13 the rank order information theory index reardon et al. describe the rank order information theory index in detail we summarize its key features here. first, let pdenote income percentile ranks in a given incomedistribution  mulative income density function . now, for any given value of p, we can dichotomize the income distribution at pand compute the residential  segregation between those with income ranks less than pand those with income ranks greater than or equal to p. let denote the h value of the traditional information theory index of segregation com puted between the two groups so de ned. likewise, let denote the e entropy of the population when divided into these two groups . that is, 11 epplog h11001 log 22p 1 h11002p and 13reardon et al. review a number of other measures of income segregation proposed in the literature, concluding that the rank order information theory measurebetter isolates the sorting unevenness dimension of income segregation than other mea sures and ensures comparability over time and place, a feature most other measureslack. the cgi shares many desirable features with but lacks rh several important features it does not accommodate spatial information, it does notallow straightforward examination of the segregation of poverty and af uence, and itis insensitive to certain types of sorting among neighborhoods. these shortcomingsrender it less preferable than .
rh this content downloaded from 155.247.167.222 on sun, 29 sep 2013 05 29 03 am all use subject to jstor terms and conditionsincome inequality and income segregation 1111te jjhp1 h11002 , h20888te j where tis the population of the metropolitan area and is the population tj of neighborhood j. then the rank order information theory index rh can be written as 1 rhp2l n ehdp. h20885 0 the rank order information theory index ranges from a minimum of zero, obtained in the case of no income segregation , to a maximum of one, obtained in the case ofcomplete income segregation . because the measure uses only information on therank ordering of household incomes within a metropolitan area, it isindependent of the income distribution. as a result, it is possible to makemeaningful comparisons across time, regardless of monetary in ation andchanges in income inequality, and across metropolitan areas and popu lation subgroups , regardless of differences in theirincome distributions. to compare the levels of within group income seg regation among racial groups, we compute the rank order informationtheory index for each racial group separately. for a detailed descriptionof the computation of from census data, see appendix a.
rh note that equation de nes as a weighted average of the binaryrh income segregation at each point in the income distribution. the weightsare proportional to the entropy , which is maximized when e pp0.5 and minimized at or . in other words, if we computed the pp0 pp1 segregation between those families above and below each point in theincome distribution and averaged these segregation values, weighting thesegregation between families with above median income and below median income the most, we get the rank order information theory index.
14 these weights have an intuitive appeal since they imply that the extentof segregation between those above and below the median is more in formative about overall residential sorting by income than the extent of 14reardon et al. show that the rank order information theory index can also be written as one minus the ratio of within neighborhood income rank order variationto overall income rank order variation. this formulation makes clear that is similar rh to the nsi and other variation ratio measures of income segregation, except thatrh relies on income ranks rather than on actual incomes. in particular, is similar torh watson s cgi. the cgi, however, cannot be written as a weighed sum of binarysegregation measures, making it less useful for our purposes, as we describe below.
this content downloaded from 155.247.167.222 on sun, 29 sep 2013 05 29 03 am all use subject to jstor terms and conditionsamerican journal of sociology 1112segregation between those above and below the 90th percentile, for example.
figure 3 provides an illustration of the information used in the calculation of , using family income data fromrh the chicago metropolitan area in 2000. the x axis of gure 3 corresponds to percentiles of the family income distribution in chicago in the 2000census, with the values of the 15 speci c census income category thresholdsmarked for reference. for example, roughly 5 of families in chicagohad incomes less than 10,000 and roughly 50 had incomes less than 60,000. the circular markers at each income threshold indicate thebetween tract segregation computed between two groups of families those with incomes below the threshold and those with incomes equal toor greater than the threshold. so, for example, the value of the informationtheory index of segregation between families earning less than 10,000and those earning greater than or equal to 10,000 was roughly 0.45 inchicago in 2000. the markers indicate segregation levels for the 15 thresh olds available in the 2000 census. the solid line describes a tted fourth order polynomial through h the measured segregation levels. in this example, the estimated rank orderinformation theory index is 0.298 . it is possible to compute a segregation pro le like this for anymetropolitan area in any year. more important, because is a function h of income percentiles rather than actual incomes, we can compare thesepro les across metropolitan areas, racial groups, or years despite differ ences in their underlying income distributions.
once we have estimated the function   a1 , we can also compute estimated values of segregation at any desiredthreshold. suppose, for example, that we wish to estimate the segregationbetween families in the top 10 of the income distribution and all others.even if there is not an income threshold in the census data that corre sponds exactly to the 90th percentile, we can estimate from the tted h polynomial . for example, even though there is no income thresh old in chicago that corresponds exactly to the 90th income percentile, wecan compute the estimated value of from the estimated hp0.370 parameters of the tted pro le in gure 3. this will enable us to h compute and compare the segregation levels of well de ned income groupseven when the census does not provide the exact information needed.
finally, as reardon et al. note, equation implies that we can easily compute spatial measures of income segregation by replacing in with its spatial analogue, the spatial information theory index, h . the spatial information theory index h takes into account the spatial proximity of neighborhoods and computes this content downloaded from 155.247.167.222 on sun, 29 sep 2013 05 29 03 am all use subject to jstor terms and conditionsfig. 3. family income segregation pro le, chicago metropolitan area, 2000. the gure indicates estimated between tract segregation between families with incomes above and at or below each percentile of the metropolitan wide family income distribution. segregation levels at each thresho ld are averages of segregation levels computed from 50 random subsamples of 10,000 families from the metropolitan area.
this content downloaded from 155.247.167.222 on sun, 29 sep 2013 05 29 03 am all use subject to jstor terms and conditionsamerican journal of sociology 1114segregation as the variation in racial composition across individuals local environments. following the work of reardon and colleagues , we compute spatial measures of incomesegregation using de nitions of local ranging from radii of 500 4,000meters in order to investigate the spatial scale of the effects of incomeinequality on income segregation.
15 measuring income inequality we measure income inequality within each race group metro year with the gini index . the gini index measures the extent to which the actual income distribution deviates from a hypothetical distribution in whicheach person receives an identical share of total income. the measureranges from zero, indicating perfect equality , to one, indicating maximuminequality . the estimationofgusually requires individual level income data so that the cumulative income shares of individuals can be plotted against the cumulative pop ulation shares. however, publically available census data provide incomedata in categories, or bins, instead of as a metric measure. thus, wecompute the gini index from census data using a procedure described indetail in nielsen and alderson .
16 data this article uses u.s. census data from the 1970 summary tape files 3a, the 1980 summary tape files 3a, the 1990 summary tape files 4a, andthe 2000 summary files 3a . for most of our analyses, we use data from the 100 metropolitanareas with the largest populations in 2000 and use consistent metropolitanarea de nitions across census years to ensure comparability of the resultsover time egocentric local environment and measures segregation as theunevenness in the income distributions of these local environments. in computing theincome distribution of a given family s local environment, nearby families are givenmore weight than less proximal families. we use the program spatialseg to compute thespatial information theory index.
16we use the prln04.exe program .
this content downloaded from 155.247.167.222 on sun, 29 sep 2013 05 29 03 am all use subject to jstor terms and conditionsincome inequality and income segregation 1115de nitions based on the 2000 census .17following jargowsky , however, we include in our analyses only cases in which there were at least10,000 families of a given race group in a given metro in each of 1970,1980, 1990, and 2000.
18as noted earlier, throughout the article we rely on tabulations of family income by census tract, except for the spatial analyses, for which we usetabulations of household income . for analyses of income segregation in the totalpopulation, our sample consists of 400 observations . for analyses using race speci c measures, oursample consists of 644 observations .
19in appendix b we discuss the comparability of data across census years.
resul ts patterns and trends in income inequality and segregation before describing our strategy for estimating the effects of income inequality on income segregation, we present some descriptive data. table2 reports the average levels of income inequality and income segregation,by race, for the 100 largest metropolitan areas in the united states. over all, metropolitan area income inequality grew from 1970 to 2000, withthe greatest increase occurring in the 1980s. average metropolitan areaincome inequality grew more rapidly for blacks than for whites, partic17these 100 metropolitan areas together were home to 173 million residents in 2000, 62 of the u.s. total population, including 70 of non hispanic blacks ,78 of hispanics , and 89 of asians . the metropolitan areasrange in population from 11.3 million to 561,000 .
18for our analyses using spatial segregation measures, we use data from the 1980, 1990, and 2000 censuses only, because large parts of many metropolitan areas werenot tracted by the census in 1970, making the computation of metropolitan areaspatial segregation measures from 1970 error prone. although some parts of met ropolitan areas were not fully tracted in 1980, untracted regions constitute only asmall part of most metropolitan areas in 1980. our results are robust to the exclusionof 1980 data.
19family income data are not available separately for hispanic and asian families in 1970. in addition, because only 13 metropolitan areas contained at least 10,000 asianfamilies in 1980, 1990, and 2000 and only 36 of the 100 largest metropolitan areascontained at least 10,000 hispanic families in 1980, 1990, and 2000, we do not includeasian and hispanic families in our analyses .
this content downloaded from 155.247.167.222 on sun, 29 sep 2013 05 29 03 am all use subject to jstor terms and conditionsamerican journal of sociology 1116table 2 income inequality and income segregation trends, by race, 100largest metropolitan areas, 1970 2000 income inequality income segregation  group 1970 1980 1990 2000 change 1970 1980 1990 2000 change b l a c k ......... . 3 7 6  w h i t e ......... . 3 4 4 . 3 4 1 . 3 6 9 . 3 8 4 . 0 4 0 . 1 1 0 . 1 1 7 . 1 3 2 . 1 3 9 . 0 2 9   black white difference . . . .032 .069 .061 .052 .020 h11002.011 .016 .041 .031 .042 all families .... . 3 5 2 . 3 6 0 . 3 8 4 . 4 0 0 . 0 4 8 . 1 2 4 . 1 3 4 . 1 5 2 . 1 5 7 . 0 3 3   note . numbers in parentheses are sds. the sample includes the 100 largest metropolitan areas . for blacks, the sample includes 61 of 100metropolitan areas with at least 10,000 black families in each census, 1970 2000.
ularly in the 1970s, a pattern that re ects the continuing growth of the black middle class that began in the 1960s.
average metropolitan area income segregation followed a similar pattern, growing from 1970 to 2000, with the fastest increase occurring inthe 1980s. for black families, income segregation grew rapidly in the1970s and 1980s, at a rate more than three times faster than the corre sponding growth of white income segregation. in fact, average black in come segregation was about 1 3 sd lower than white income segregation in 1970 but was about 1 sd higher than white income segregation by 1990. as gure 4 shows, these patterns suggest a relationship betweenincome inequality and income segregation for both black and white fam ilies, as well as for the total population, changes in income segregationappear to roughly mirror changes in income inequality.
the trends in metropolitan area income segregation reported in table 2 and gure 4 do not match the patterns found in some prior research.watson , for example, found that average metropolitan area incomesegregation of all families, as measured by the cgi, declined slightly inthe 1970s and 1990s but rose sharply in the 1980s. jargowsky andyang and jargowsky , however, found that average metropolitanarea income segregation of both white and black families, as measuredby the nsi, rose in the 1970s and 1980s but declined sharply in the 1990s.our estimated trends differ from these for two primary reasons. first, weuse a different measure of income segregation than these prior studies,for reasons we describe above. second, our estimates are based on the100 largest metropolitan areas, whereas watson uses 216 metroareas jargowsky uses 228 and 76 metropolitan areas for the white this content downloaded from 155.247.167.222 on sun, 29 sep 2013 05 29 03 am all use subject to jstor terms and conditionsfig. 4. trends in family income inequality and income segregation, 1970 2000, by race, 100 largest metropolitan areas. black trends are based on 61 metropolitan areas with at least 10,000 black families in each census year, 1970 2000.
this content downloaded from 155.247.167.222 on sun, 29 sep 2013 05 29 03 am all use subject to jstor terms and conditionsamerican journal of sociology 1118and black trends, respectively, from 1970 to 1990 and yang and jargowsky use 324 and 130 metropolitan areas for the white and blacktrends, respectively, from 1990 to 2000. our restriction to the 100 largestmetropolitan areas has substantial implications for the estimated trends,as is evident in gure 5, which shows trends in income inequality andsegregation for smaller metropolitan areas . for small metropolitan areas, the trends in incomeinequality are very similar to those for large metropolitan areas, but thetrends in income segregation are quite different. income segregation insmall metropolitan areas is, on average, much lower than for large met ropolitan areas. in addition, income segregation in small metropolitanareas declined in both the 1970s and 1990s . pooling the trends for large and small metropolitan areaswould yield a trend similar to that described by watson decliningaverage income segregation in the 1970s and 1990s and a sharp increasein average income segregation in the 1980s.
although table 2 and gure 4 show changes in the average values of the rank order information theory index from 1970 to 2000, they do notprovide detail on the extent to which changes in income segregation aredue to changes in the segregation of af uence and poverty. figures 6 8 show average metropolitan area segregationpro les for 1970 2000. these enable us to examine the extent to whichsegregation has changed between the poor and nonpoor and the rich andnonrich, for example.
figure 6 shows the trend in the average income segregation pro le across the 100 largest metropolitan areas from 1970 to 2000. first, notethat in 1970, the poor were much less segregated from the nonpoor thanthe rich were from the nonrich. income segregation between the poor andnonpoor grew sharply between 1970 and 1980,however, whereas income segregation of the rich and nonrich did not. in the 1980s, however, income segregation grew atall parts of the income distribution. in the 1990s, in contrast, incomesegregation grew only modestly, and only between families in the middlepart of the income distribution. on average, the segregation of povertyand the segregation of af uence were relatively unchanged in the 1990s.these gures demonstrate that a single measure of income segregationmay not fully convey the pattern of changes.
figures 7 and 8 show the corresponding trends for white and black families separately. as we would expect, given the size ofthe white population, the trends for white income segregation are similarto those of the population as a whole. the trends in black family incomesegregation, however, are rather different. black income segregation grew this content downloaded from 155.247.167.222 on sun, 29 sep 2013 05 29 03 am all use subject to jstor terms and conditionsfig. 5. trends in family income inequality and income segregation, 1970 2000, by race, small metropolitan areas. samples for each panel of the  gure include all metropolitan areas with at least 10,000 families of the respective group in each year, 1970 2000, excluding the 100 largest metropo litan areas. trends for all families are based on 179 metropolitan areas, trends for white families are based on 176 metropolitan areas, and trends for blackfamilies are based on 15 metropolitan areas.
this content downloaded from 155.247.167.222 on sun, 29 sep 2013 05 29 03 am all use subject to jstor terms and conditions1120 fig. 6. trends in average metropolitan area income segregation, by income percentile, all families, 100 largest metropolitan areas, 1970 2000. the left panel of the gure indicates estimated average between tract segregation between families with incomes at or above and below each percentile of the metropolitan wide family income distribution. the right panel shows trends for between tractsegregation at three speci c percentiles.
this content downloaded from 155.247.167.222 on sun, 29 sep 2013 05 29 03 am all use subject to jstor terms and conditions1121 fig. 7. trends in average metropolitan area income segregation, by income percentile, white families, 100 largest metropolitan areas, 1970 2000.
the left panel of the gure indicates estimated average between tract segregation between white families with incomes at or above and below each percentile of the metropolitan wide family income distribution. the right panel shows trends forbetween tract segregation at three speci c percentiles.
this content downloaded from 155.247.167.222 on sun, 29 sep 2013 05 29 03 am all use subject to jstor terms and conditionsfig. 8. trends in average metropolitan area income segregation, by income percentile, black families, 61 largest metropolitan areas with at least 10,000 black families, 1970 2000. the left panel of the gure indicates estimated average between tract segregation between black families with incomes at or above and below each percentile of the metropolitan wide family income distribution. the right panel shows trends for between tract segregation at three speci c percentiles.
this content downloaded from 155.247.167.222 on sun, 29 sep 2013 05 29 03 am all use subject to jstor terms and conditionsincome inequality and income segregation 1123rapidly in the 1970s and 1980s at all parts of the black income distribution.
not only did low income black families become more isolated from mid dle and higher income black families, but higher income blacks becameincreasingly segregated from lower and middle income black families aswell. in the 1990s, this trend ceased abruptly. in fact, the segregation oflower and moderate income black families from higher income blackfamilies declined slightly in the 1990s.
the tables and gures above describe patterns and trends in income segregation using aspatial measures of segregation. these measures treatcensus tracts as discrete, spatially anonymous units and so are not fullysensitive to changing spatial patterns of segregation. in particular, theyare insensitive to the spatial scale of segregation they do not indicate theextent to which segregation levels are due to the large or small scalespatial patterning of families in residential space. figure 9 reports averagesegregation pro les similar to those in gures 6 8 but using the spatialinformation theory index computed at arange of spatial scales instead of the tract based information theory indexused in the gures above.
in particular, gure 9 shows the average spatial information theory index household income segregation threshold pro le computed using ra dii of 500, 1,000, 2,000, and 4,000 meters for the 100 largest metropolitanareas in 2000.
20these radii correspond roughly to local environments ranging from pedestrian in size to those that areconsiderably larger the size of a large high schoolattendance zone, for example in scale than the neighborhoods in whichmost people attend church, shop, and do much of their socializing . in addition, gure 9 shows the macro micro segregationratio , which measures theproportion of micro scale segregation that is due to macro scale segregation patterns. this ratio can beinterpreted as a measure of the geographic scale of segregation, with largervalues indicating that more of the measured segregation is due to theseparation of groups over large distances .
t wo key patterns are evident in gure 9. first, spatial income segregation patterns are very similar to the aspatial patterns shown in gure6. segregation of high income households from other households is, ingeneral, higher than the segregation of low income households from otherhouseholds, regardless of the radius at which segregation is measured.
20we are able to use household income for the spatial measures rather than family income because we do not analyze spatial patterns for black and white families sep arately. as noted above, family and household income segregation are highly correlated.
this content downloaded from 155.247.167.222 on sun, 29 sep 2013 05 29 03 am all use subject to jstor terms and conditionsfig. 9. average metropolitan area spatial household income segregation, by income percentile and local environment radius, 100 largest metropolitan areas, 2000. solid lines indicate estimated average between tract segregation between families with incomes above and at or below each percentile of the metropolitan wide family incomedistribution. the dashed line indicates the ratio of segregation using a 4,000 meter radius to that using a 500 meter radius.
this content downloaded from 155.247.167.222 on sun, 29 sep 2013 05 29 03 am all use subject to jstor terms and conditionsincome inequality and income segregation 1125second, this pattern appears to be largely, if not entirely, due to the fact that upper income households are much more segregated at a large geo graphic scale than lower income households. for high income households,60 or more of segregation patterns are due to macro scale segregation presumably the concentration of high income households in wealthy sub urban and exurban areas. for low income households, 40 or less ofsegregation patterns are due to macro scale segregation this implies thatthe poor are less concentrated spatially than the wealthy in most met ropolitan areas.
in sum, our descriptive analyses reveal several important trends. first, average metropolitan area income inequality and segregation both grewfrom 1970 to 2000, though the growth in income segregation was muchlarger for black families than for white families. second, income segre gation grew at all parts of the income distribution from 1970 to 2000,though at different times and at different rates for black and white fam ilies. most of the growth in income segregation occurred between 1970and 1990. nonetheless, both the segregation of poverty and the segregationof af uence were much higher in 2000 than they had been in 1970 forwhite and black families alike. and third, the segregation of af uence isgenerally greater than the segregation of poverty in the 100 largest met ropolitan areas, a pattern that appears to be driven by the macro scalesegregation of the highest earners from others. in the next section of thearticle, we investigate the extent to which variation in income inequalitycan explain these patterns.
estimating the effects of income inequality on income segregation we estimate the effect of income inequality on income segregation using a set of xed effects regression models. the models rely on 644 metro group year cases, as noted above. because each observation in the datacorresponds to a speci c metropolitan area, decade, and race group, thereare three potential sources of variation in income inequality variationacross decades , variation among metropolitan areas , and variation between race groups .
21we use three different  xed effects models, each relying on a different source of variation inincome inequality, to estimate the effect of income inequality on segre gation over time, across race groups, and across metropolitan areas, re spectively.
21only 61 of the 100 metropolitan areas have this latter variation because we include observations for black families in the sample only for the 61 metropolitan areas wherethere are at least 10,000 black families in each of the four census years.
this content downloaded from 155.247.167.222 on sun, 29 sep 2013 05 29 03 am all use subject to jstor terms and conditionsamerican journal of sociology 1126in addition, we wish to ensure that our estimates of the effect of inequality on segregation are not biased by any confounding metropolitan level covariates that are correlated with both inequality and segregation.on the basis of previous research, we control for metropolitan demo graphic characteristics, housing market pressures and housing stock, intra and intermetropolitan mobility, population growth, labor market char acteristics, and family structure 22. notably, because the u.s.census does not provide information on family wealth, we are unable toinclude controls for metro , year , and race speci c aspects of the distri bution of wealth in our models. although wealth is only modestly cor related with income, it plays a key role in residential location because itenables families to buy housing in communities where their current incomemay be insuf cient and provides a nancial cushion during unstable times,such as temporary unemployment, illness, or divorce, and so enables fam ilies to remain in their home when their income cannot support them. nonetheless, research suggests that wealth may not be asigni cant factor in neighborhood migration patterns , al though it is a stronger predictor of neighborhood choice for blacks thanit is for non hispanic whites .
in the rst set of regression models , we estimate the effect of changes in inequality on changes in segregation, including bothmetropolitan area group xed effects and decade xed effects. these models have the form hpa7i h11001g h11001d h11001xb h11001ww h11001e,  mgy mgy mg y my mgy mgy where mindexes metropolitan areas, gindexes race groups, yindexes census years, and and indicate the rank order segregation and himgy mgy income inequality, respectively, in metropolitan area mfor group gin year y. the models include metropolitan area group and decade gdmg y  xed effects. the coef cient aon inequality from this model indicates the average within metro group association between inequalityand segregation, net of any secular trend common to all metropolitanareas and race groups. model 2 includes a set of metro year and group22more speci cally, to control for these factors in our models, we include metropolitanlevel population counts of each race group percentage older than 65 and younger than18 years old percentage with at least a high school diploma by race percentage foreignborn percentage in the manufacturing sector percentage in the managerial professionalsector percentage in nance, insurance, and real estate percentage in the constructionsector percentage unemployed by race per capita income by race intra and inter metropolitan mobility percentage new housing construction and percentage female headed households by race. the data sources for and construction of each of thesevariables are described in more detail in app. b.
this content downloaded from 155.247.167.222 on sun, 29 sep 2013 05 29 03 am all use subject to jstor terms and conditionsincome inequality and income segregation 1127metro year covariates as control variables in addition to xwmy mgy the xed effects. we compute bootstrapped standard errors in all of the regression models to take into account the clustered nature of the obser vations.
in the second set of models , we estimate the effect of differences in income inequality between race groups on income segre gation, using metropolitan area year xed effects and group speci c dummy variables. these models have the form hpa7i h11001g h11001d h11001ww h11001e,  mgy mgy my g mgy mgy where and are metropolitan area year and group speci c xed gdmy g effects, respectively. the coef cient aon inequality from this model indicates the average within metro year association between inequality and segregation, net of any average differences ininequality and segregation between race groups across metropolitan areasand time. model 4 includes a small set of group metro year covariates ascontrol variables as well as the xed effects.
in the third set of models , we estimate the effect of differences in income inequality among racial groups on income segre gation, using metropolitan area and group year xed effects. these models have the form hpa7i h11001g h11001d h11001xb h11001ww h11001e,  mgy mgy gy m my mgy mgy where and are group year and metropolitan area xed effects, gdgy m respectively. the coef cient aon inequality from this model indicates the average within group year association be tween inequality and segregation, net of any average differences in in equality and segregation among metropolitan areas across groups anddecades. model 6 includes a set of group metro year and metro year co variates as control variables as well as the xed effects. because the threemodels rely on different sources of variation in income inequality, eachrelies on a different key assumption in order to support a causal claimabout the effect of income inequality on income segregation.
23as a result, 23the models that include metro group xed effects rely on the assumption that changes in income inequality within a metropolitan area and race group over time areexogenous, conditional on secular trends common to all groups and metropolitan areasand the set of included covariates in the model. the models that include metro year  xed effects rely on the assumption that differences between white and black incomeinequality within the same metropolitan area and decade are exogenous, once we haveaccounted for differences in income inequality between white and black families thatare common across metropolitan areas and time and differences in inequality that areassociated with differences in the covariates included in the model. and nally, themodels that include group year and metropolitan area xed effects rely on the assumption that differences in income inequality within a given year and for a givenrace group are exogenous, once we have accounted for stable differences among metthis content downloaded from 155.247.167.222 on sun, 29 sep 2013 05 29 03 am all use subject to jstor terms and conditionsamerican journal of sociology 1128if the three sets of models produce similar results, we can rule out many potential sources of bias. as an additional set of sensitivity checks, weestimate a set of models for each race group separately and a set for eachdecade separately.
main effects of income inequality on income segregation table 3 reports the estimates from the models described in equations   above. of primary interest here are the estimated coef cients on the gini index in models 2, 4, and 6, which include the full set of covariatesas well as the xed effects. model 2 yields an estimated association of0.467 between income inequality and income segregation, net of the model s xed effects and covariates. in other words,a change of one point in a group s income inequality is associated witha change of roughly half a point in income segregation. note also thatmodel 1 implies that changes in income inequality alone do not fullyexplain the trends in income segregation even after controlling for incomeinequality, within group income segregation grew, on average, by 0.013points in the 1970s and by another 0.015 points in the 1980s.
model 4, which relies on variation in income inequality between white and black families within the same metropolitan area and year, yields anestimated association between inequality and segregation of 0.783 , somewhat larger than the estimate from model 2. note that model 3 implies that income inequality alone more than accounts forthe differences in income segregation between black and white families.model 3 implies that income segregation among black families is lower , on average, than among white families within the same metropolitan areaand year, given the same level of income inequality.
finally, model 6 yields an estimated association between income inequality and income segregation of 0.502 . thus, each of the three models yields estimated coef cients on income inequalitythat imply that inequality has a positive effect on income segregation. toget a sense of the magnitude of these effects, note that an effect of 0.500 implies that the changes in income ropolitan areas and differences associated with the covariates in the model. none of these three assumptions are likely to be perfectly true, but each model is somewhatinsulated against threats to another. if we are worried about temporal confoundingbiasing the estimates from the rst models, e.g., we can examine the second and thirdsets of models, each of which relies on cross sectional variation across groups or met ropolitan areas. if we are worried about unobserved group speci c factors, such as acorrelation between employment sector and preferences for neighbors, biasing theestimates in the second set of models, we can look to the rst and third sets of models,each of which relies only on within group variation .
this content downloaded from 155.247.167.222 on sun, 29 sep 2013 05 29 03 am all use subject to jstor terms and conditionsincome inequality and income segregation 1129table 3 estimated effects of income inequality on income segregation, 1970 2000 source of variation in income inequality temporal metro  race cellsbetween race metro year cellsbetween metro race year cells model 1 model 2 model 3 model 4 model 5 model 6 gi n i i n d e x .......... .385 .467 .431 .783 .286 .502    yearp1980 ....... .013 .029    yearp1990 ....... .028 .032    yearp2000 ....... .026 .027   bl a c k ................ h11002.013 h11002.065    model speci cation  metro year covariates ........ y e s y e s group metro year covariates ..... y e s y e s y e s metro group  xed effects . . . yes yes metro year  xed effects . . . yes yes group year  xed effects . . . yes yes metro xed effects .......... y e s y e s adjusted r2........ .879 .933 .691 .770 .822 .883 observations ....... 6 4 4 6 4 4 4 8 8 4 8 8 6 4 4 6 4 4 note . bootstrapped ses are in parentheses. the sample includes observations from the 100 largest metropolitan areas in 2000, excluding black observations from 39 metro politan areas with fewer than 10,000 black families in 1970. coef cients on covariates and xed effects are not shown. metro year covariates include metro population unemploymentrate proportion under age 18 proportion over age 65 proportion with high school diploma proportion foreign born proportion female headed families per capita income proportionsemployed in manufacturing, construction, nancial and real estate, professional, and man agerial jobs and proportions of housing built within 10, ve, and one years. group metro year covariates include race group speci c population, per capita income, proportion withhigh school diploma, proportion female headed families, and unemployment rate.
 p  .05.
 p .01.
 p .001.
this content downloaded from 155.247.167.222 on sun, 29 sep 2013 05 29 03 am all use subject to jstor terms and conditionsamerican journal of sociology 1130inequality from 1970 to 2000 shown in table 2 account for roughly 40  of the average change in black income segregation, 80 of the averagechange in white income segregation, and 60 of the average change inoverall income segregation. put differently, a 1 sd change in income in equality leads to roughly a 0.25 sd change in income segregation.
24 to ensure that the estimates from models 2, 4, and 6 are not driven by one particular race group or decade, we t an additional set of modelsfor each race group separately and another set of models for each decadeseparately. the results of these models are shown in table 4. in each model,the coef cient on inequality is positive and statistically signi cant. in thegroup speci c models, the coef cients range from 0.450 to 0.561 in thedecade speci c models, the coef cients range from 0.624 to 0.732. thus,across all the models shown in tables 3 and 4, we nd that income in equality has a large and positive association with income segregation,regardless of whether we rely on temporal, between group, or between  metropolitan area variation to identify this association and regardless of which groups or decades we use in the sample.
25 effects of income inequality on the segregation of poverty andaf uence one advantage of the information theory index is that it enables us to investigate whether income inequality more strongly affects income seg regation through the segregation of poverty or the segregation of af uence.to answer this, we t models identical to models 2, 4, and 6 above butusing income segregation measured at a set of income percentiles rather than the rank24these are computed from the 1970 2000 changes in inequality and segregation shown in table 2. for example, income inequality among all families grew by 0.048 from 1970to 2000. if the effect of income inequality on segregation were 0.500, this would implya change in income segregation of , which is roughly 70 of the 0.048 70.5p0.024 observed total change in income segregation from 1970 to 2000. likewise, thestandard deviation of income inequality within a given year was roughly 0.025, onaverage, whereas the standard deviation of income segregation was roughly 0.050.this implies that an effect of 0.500 corresponds to an effect size of 0.25.
25in additional analyses not shown here, we estimate the same set of models on a sample of smaller metropolitan areas . this sample includes 179 metropolitan areas. the estimates from models on these samplesyield much smaller coef cient estimates . ap0.200 this suggests that the effects of income inequality on income segregation are muchstronger in large metropolitan areas than in smaller ones, a nding that may helpexplain the difference in the trends in income segregation in small relative to largemetropolitan areas observed in gs. 4 and 5 above.
this content downloaded from 155.247.167.222 on sun, 29 sep 2013 05 29 03 am all use subject to jstor terms and conditionsincome inequality and income segregation 1131table 4 estimated effects of income inequality on income segregation, 1970 2000 ,b y race group and decade by race group by decade all families white black 1970 1980 1990 2000 gini index ........... . 5 6 1 . 4 5 0 . 4 7 0 . 6 2 4 . 6 4 9 . 6 8 8 . 7 3 2    yearp1980 ........ . 0 2 7 . 0 2 8 . 0 6 5    yearp1990 ........ . 0 2 5 . 0 2 4 . 0 9 5    yearp2000 ........ . 0 1 2 . 0 1 6 . 0 8 7    b l a c k ................ h11002.111 h11002.036 h11002.013 .044   metro year covariates ......... y e s y e s y e s group metro year covariates ......... y e s y e s y e s y e s y e s y e s metro xed effects . . . yes yes yes yes yes yes yesadjusted r 2......... . 9 5 9 . 9 5 6 . 9 2 1 . 6 8 9 . 7 8 9 . 8 2 1 . 8 6 6 o b s e r v a t i o n s ......... 4 0 0 4 0 0 2 4 4 1 6 1 1 6 1 1 6 1 1 6 1 note . bootstrapped ses are in parentheses. the sample includes observations from the 100 largest metropolitan areas in 2000, excluding black observations from 39 metro politan areas with fewer than 10,000 black families in 1970. coef cients on covariates and xed effects are not shown. metro year covariates include metro population unemploymentrate proportion under age 18 proportion over age 65 proportion with a high school diploma proportion foreign born proportion female headed families per capita income proportionsemployed in manufacturing, construction, nancial and real estate, professional, and man agerial jobs and proportions of housing built within 10, ve, and one years. group metro year covariates include race group speci c population, per capita income, proportion withhigh school diploma, proportion female headed families, and unemployment rate.
 p  .05.
 p .01.
 p .001.
order information theory index as the outcome. in addition, we t these models separately by race , again using segregation measuredat a set of percentiles as the outcome variables.
the estimates from these models are reported in gures 10 and 11 . figure 10 shows that income inequality haslittle or no signi cant impact on the segregation of the very poorest familiesof a metropolitan area from all other families but has large and signi canteffects on the segregation of moderate to high income families from thosewith lower incomes. this pattern holds across the three models. in otherwords, income inequality appears to be much more strongly linked to thesegregation of af uence than to the segregation of poverty.
this content downloaded from 155.247.167.222 on sun, 29 sep 2013 05 29 03 am all use subject to jstor terms and conditions1132 fig. 10. estimated effects of family income inequality on income segregation, by percentile of income distribution and model, 100 largest metropolitan areas, 1970 2000. bars indicate 95 con dence interval for estimates. model speci cations and samples are identical to those of model 2 , model 4 , and model 6 in table 3.
this content downloaded from 155.247.167.222 on sun, 29 sep 2013 05 29 03 am all use subject to jstor terms and conditions1133 fig. 11. estimated effects of family income inequality on income segregation, by percentile of income distribution and race, 100 largest metropolitan areas, 1970 2000. bars indicate 95 con dence interval for estimates. model speci cations and samples are identical to those of cols. 1 3 of table 4.
this content downloaded from 155.247.167.222 on sun, 29 sep 2013 05 29 03 am all use subject to jstor terms and conditionsamerican journal of sociology 1134the same general pattern is true when we investigate the effects of income inequality on income segregation for white and black families separately, as shown in gure 11. however, the effect of inequality on the segregation of af uence is much stronger for black families than for white families. that is, in metropolitan areas and years when black incomeinequality is largest, the highest earning 10 of black families are muchmore segregated from the lower 90 of black families than when and where black income inequality is low.
effects of income inequality on spatial segregation patterns our third set of analyses investigates whether income inequality produces macro and or micro scale income segregation patterns. for these anal yses, we focus on the relationship between overall income inequality and household income segregation rather than race speci c family income inequality and segregation. as above, we focus on the 100 largest metropolitan areas in 2000. we t models that include metropolitan area andyear xed effects and a set of metropolitan area year covariates .
in order to investigate the geographic scale of the effects of income inequality, we t these models using ve different measures of spatial segregation four using different radii and one using the measure of net micro segregation described by lee et al. . our rationale for this is as follows. the level of segregation among micro environments can be thought of as made up of twononnegative components a component that is due to macro scale segregation patterns that is, segregation among macro environments plus a component that is due to micro scale variation in neighborhood composition over and above themacro scale patterns. by de nition, then, the effect of inequality on seg regation among micro scale environments will be equal to the sum of itseffect on macro scale segregation and its effect on net micro segregation.
thus, by comparing the effect estimates across the outcome measures, we can infer the geographic scale at which income inequality affects segre gation. for example, if inequality affects segregation among micro en vironments much more than it affects segregation among macro environ ments, then the effect of segregation must operate primarily to increasethe small scale spatial patterning of income . con versely, if inequality affects segregation among micro and macro scaleenvironments equally, then the effect of segregation must operate prithis content downloaded from 155.247.167.222 on sun, 29 sep 2013 05 29 03 am all use subject to jstor terms and conditionsincome inequality and income segregation 1135marily to increase the macro scale spatial patterning of income .
our estimates of these different effects are shown in table 5. the key result in table 5 is the consistency of the point estimates of the effect ofinequality , regardless of the radius usedto de ne a household s local environment. in each model, and regardlessof the span of years, income inequality has a signi cant effect on macro scale segregation and a roughlysimilar sized effect on smaller scale segregation . moreover, the effect of income inequality on net micro scale seg regation is indistinguishable from zero in thesemodels, implying that the effect of income inequality on segregation op erates entirely through its effect on macro segregation. in other words,income inequality affects income segregation by shaping residential pat terns at a large spatial scale rather than by increasing the block to blocksorting of households by income.
in gure 12, we present the results of an analysis that combines features of two of the preceding analyses. here we report the effects of incomeinequality on spatial household income segregation at speci c percentilesof the income distribution and using different local environment radii tocompute spatial segregation. the left hand panel of gure 12 shows thatincome inequality has a large positive effect on the spatial segregation ofaf uence but a negative effect on the spatial segregation of extreme pov erty when segregation is com puted among local environments of 500 meter radius. the center panelindicates that income inequality has a similar effect on macro scale seg regation except in the bottom quartile of the income distribution. theright hand panel of gure 12 describes the portion of the effect of incomeinequality on 500 meter radius segregation that is not due to macro scalesegregation effects . except for the effectson the segregation of poverty, these net micro scale effects are indistin guishable from zero. income inequality does, however, appear to reducethe segregation of extreme poverty by reducing the small scale patterningof the segregation of the very poor, a nding consistent with the fact thatincome inequality may actually compress the lower part of the incomedistribution. as we note above, when the lower part of the income dis tribution is compressed, low income households at different percentiles ofthe income distribution may be more likely to be able to afford to live inthe same neighborhoods, leading to lower income segregation. in sum, gure 12 suggests that income inequality affects income segregation prithis content downloaded from 155.247.167.222 on sun, 29 sep 2013 05 29 03 am all use subject to jstor terms and conditionsamerican journal of sociology 1136table 5 estimated effects of income inequality on spatial income segregation, 100 largest metropolitan areas, 1980 2000 sample outcome  years included h h h h h 1980 2000 . . . .377 .355 .411 .414 h11002.036   .915 .894 .874 .852 .909 1990 2000 . . . .396 .401 .385 .368 .028   .940 .942 .942 .940 .890 1980 .......... .351 .364 .416 .366 h11002.016   .629 .621 .585 .586 .235 1990 .......... .466 .486 .497 .458 .008   .563 .550 .504 .444 .462 2000 .......... .270 .299 .290 .260 .009   .385 .388 .377 .369 .268 note . bootstrapped ses are in parentheses below estimated coef cients. adjusted r2 s are reported below the ses. the top two rows are based on models that include metropolitanarea and year xed effects and the set of metro year covariates described in the text. the bottom three rows are based on models that include metro year covariates but no xedeffects.
 p  .05.
 p .01.
 p .001.
marily by increasing the macro scale separation of the af uent from all others. as income inequality grows, this suggests, the middle and upper middle classes become increasingly concentrated together at relativelylarge distances from those with lower incomes.
discussion and conclusions our analysis yields four main ndings. first, we reproduce the ndingin mayer and watson linking income inequality to income segregation. using a set of xed effects regression models, we show thatthere is a strong and robust relationship between within race metropolitanarea income inequality and within race metropolitan area income seg regation, net of secular trends, stable between race differences, and stabledifferences among metropolitan areas. our estimates indicate that a 1 sd increase in income inequality leads to a 0.25 sd increase in incomesegregation, an effect roughly half the size of that found by watson .nonetheless, these effects are large enough to be substantially meaningful  this content downloaded from 155.247.167.222 on sun, 29 sep 2013 05 29 03 am all use subject to jstor terms and conditionsfig. 12. estimated effects of income inequality on spatial household income segregation, by local environment radius and percentile of income distribution, 100 largest metropolitan areas, 1980 2000. bars indicate 95 con dence interval for estimates. model speci cations and samples areidentical to those of col. 1 of table 4. the left panel shows estimates from models in which the outcome variable is the spatial information theoryindex using a 500 meter radius and computed at the speci ed percentiles. the middle panel shows estimates in which the outcome variable is h the same but using a 4,000 meter radius. the right panel shows the estimates from models in which the outcome is the net micro segregation thedifference between and . h h  500m 4,000m this content downloaded from 155.247.167.222 on sun, 29 sep 2013 05 29 03 am all use subject to jstor terms and conditionsamerican journal of sociology 1138they imply that increasing income inequality was responsible for 40  80 of the changes in income segregation from 1970 to 2000. the strength and consistency of our results across a wide range of model speci cationssuggest that this is a robust relationship, at least among large metropolitanareas in the decades from 1970 to 2000. the estimated effect, however,is much weaker among small metropolitan areas. moreover, it is importantto keep in mind that this analysis investigates the effect of income in equality in an era of rising inequality. it is not clear to what extent these ndings generalize to eras of lower, or stable, inequality.
one might be concerned that our estimated effects are subject to various forms of bias. for example, despite our efforts to use a range of modelingstrategies to protect our estimates from unobserved confounding, the es timated associations here may nonetheless be biased by the presence ofsome unaccounted for factors that shape both income inequality and in come segregation. the consistency of the results across three sources ofvariation, however, strongly suggests a causal relationship. more impor tant, one might worry that the estimated associations represent the effectsof segregation on inequality rather than the other way around. certainlythere is reason to suspect that income segregation may engender increasedincome inequality by providing differential access to quality schooling,high paying labor markets, and differential social capital. however, manymechanisms that would drive such effects would require considerable timeto take effect , so we think that these are less plausibleexplanations for our ndings. nonetheless, we test the hypothesis of re verse causality by reversing our regressions . in each case, the estimated associations between segregationand inequality are positive and statistically signi cant but much smallerin magnitude than the effects we report.
26 our second main nding is that income inequality affects income segregation primarily by affecting the segregation of af uence rather thanthe segregation of poverty. although the segregation of poverty increasedfrom 1970 to 2000 for both white and black families as well as for allfamilies, very little of this change is attributable to changes in incomeinequality. indeed, income inequality affects the relative incomes of lower income households only to a small degree and may actually compress thelow end of the income distribution. this suggests that changes in incomeinequality would be expected to have little effect on the segregation ofpoverty. our estimates of the effect of income inequality on spatial seg26while inequality explains one half to two thirds of the variation in segregation, segregation explains only one fth of the variation in inequality.
this content downloaded from 155.247.167.222 on sun, 29 sep 2013 05 29 03 am all use subject to jstor terms and conditionsincome inequality and income segregation 1139regation, in fact, suggest that income inequality may slightly reduce the spatial segregation of low income households. given that income in equality does not seem to drive the patterns of the segregation of poverty,we suspect that the segregation of poverty is more a result of housingpolicy than of income inequality. through the 1980s, federal and met ropolitan housing policies fostered the development of high density hous ing for low income families. these policies are likely responsible for muchof the growth of the segregation of poverty over that time. likewise, thegrowth in scattered site low income and mixed income housing in the1990s, coupled with the demolition of some large, high density publichousing projects, may account for the stabilization of the segregation ofpoverty in the 1990s.
third, we nd that the relationship between income inequality and income segregation differs for black and white families. in 1970, incomesegregation among black families was lower than among white families.this is likely the result of the ghettoization of minorities that took place,particularly in northern and midwestern american cities, during the post  world war ii suburbanization boom. because of housing discrimination, black families were largely denied access to suburban areas, leaving bothmiddle and lower income black families living in relative proximity inurban areas. the passage of housing and lending antidiscrimination leg islation in the 1970s, however, began to reduce the prevalence of housingdiscrimination, making a wider range of neighborhood options availableto middle income black families. as a result, income segregation amongblack families rose steeply from 1970 to 1990, as the growing black middleclass was able to move into previously inaccessible suburban areas. by1980, in fact, income segregation among black families was higher thanamong white families. in this era, black income inequality is stronglyrelated to the segregation of high income black families in neighborhoodsseparate from lower income black families. although this growth in in come segregation among black families is a result of both the growingblack middle class and reductions in housing discrimination both signsof progress since the 1960s it nonetheless may have negative conse quences. given high levels of racial segregation in u.s. cities, the growthof income segregation among black families results in the increasing racialand socioeconomic isolation of lower income black families in neighbor hoods of concentrated disadvantage .
finally, we nd that the effects of income inequality on income segregation are driven primarily by the effects of inequality on macro scalepatterns of segregation. coupled with our earlier nding regarding theeffects of inequality on the segregation of af uence, this means that incomeinequality appears to increase income segregation largely by inducing thehighest earning families to move far away from lower income households.
this content downloaded from 155.247.167.222 on sun, 29 sep 2013 05 29 03 am all use subject to jstor terms and conditionsamerican journal of sociology 1140the expansion of suburban and exurban areas in the last few decades, facilitated by the growth of the highway system and the movement of many high skill industries to the suburban ring, has allowed families to move farther away from metropolitan cores while still engaging in the high skill labor market. the fact that the effect of income inequality onincome segregation is much weaker in small metropolitan areas is consistent with this explanation. because macro scale segregation is often notpossible in small metropolitan areas, inequality may have little room to affect income segregation. if one of the key amenities that high income families desire to purchase is space large lots, very low density housing, and access to parks and undeveloped open space then they will be much more able to do so in large metropolitan areas.
in sum, our analyses show that income inequality has a strong and robust effect on income segregation but that this effect is more nuanced in form than one might initially expect. in fact, income inequality appears to be responsible for a speci c aspect of income segregation the largescale separation of the af uent from lower income households and families. it does not, however, appear to be responsible for patterns of segregation of poverty . nor is it responsible for patterns of small scale income segregation, such as those seen resulting from the gentri cation of urban neighborhoods adjacent to poor, nongentrifying neighborhoods.
the macro scale spatial segregation of high income households from middle and low income households may have important and far reaching consequences, particularly given that the top 10 of earners in the united states now receive 45 of all income. the segregation of these highincome households in communities spatially far from lower income house holds may reduce the likelihood that high income residents will have social, or even casual, contact with lower income residents. this in turn may make it less likely that they are willing to invest in metropolitanwide public resources that would bene t residents of all income levels,such as transportation networks, utilities, parks, services, and culturalamenities. moreover, the spatial separation of the af uent and poor impliesthat there will be few opportunities for disadvantaged families to bene t from local spillover of public goods. the distance between af uent and lower income communities makes it unlikely that disadvantaged familieswill be able to take advantage of the local schools, parks, and services inwhich af uent communities invest. although most sociological theory andresearch regarding the spatial distribution of income have focused on theeffects of concentrated poverty on residents of poor neighborhoods, the  ndings here suggest that a better understanding of the effects of con centrated af uence on residents far from af uent communities is needed this content downloaded from 155.247.167.222 on sun, 29 sep 2013 05 29 03 am all use subject to jstor terms and conditionsincome inequality and income segregation 1141as well. the segregation of af uence may directly affect the resources available to residents of both poor and lower income neighborhoods.
given the evidence that income inequality has sizable effects on income segregation, it is plausible that income segregation may mediate the effectsof income inequality on social outcomes. a large body of research haslinked income inequality to negative health outcomes such as increasedmorbidity, mortality, and infant death as well as to negative effects oneducational attainment, crime rates, social capital, network ties, and po litical institutions . al though some scholars have argued that income segregation may serve asa mechanism that links income inequality to some of these negative socialoutcomes , the scant research on this topic has produced mixed results. mayerand sarin explicitly test this hypothesis and show that incomesegregation is one mechanism that links income inequality to infant mor tality at the state level. however, other research nds that economic seg regation does not mediate the relationship between income inequality andmortality or between income inequalityand the distribution of educational attainment . clearly the role of income segregation as a mediator between income inequality andvarious social outcomes warrants further investigation, as does the directimpact of income segregation on other forms of social inequality.
this content downloaded from 155.247.167.222 on sun, 29 sep 2013 05 29 03 am all use subject to jstor terms and conditionsamerican journal of sociology 1142appendix a computing income segregation practical issues in computing the rank order information theory index,rh to compute from equation , we need to know the functionrhh  over the domain . in practice, however , we can compute for only a nite number of values of p, corresponding h to the income category thresholds that the census uses to report incomes.
for example, in the 2000 census, income was reported in 16 categories . these allow us to compute at 15 distinct values of p f , , in this case . within each census tract, the census f f provides counts of the number of families with incomes below each of these income thresholds. for eachof the thresholds, we can compute p, the proportion of the population with incomes below the threshold, and , the information theory index h of segregation between those below the thresholds and those at or above the thresholds. following reardon et al. , we then approximate thefunction over the range by tting an mth order polynomial to h the values, weighting each point by the square of e 2j2 m hpb h11001bp h11001bp h11001 h11001 bp h11001e,e n0, . 01 2 mp p 2e we use a fourth order polynomial here, but our results are insensitive to the choice of any higher order polynomial. if is the estimated kth co bk ef cient from this model, then reardon et al. show that equation  will evaluate to m m h11002n12 mn r hpb h11001b h11001 h11001 h11001 2 b, h20888 01 m 22 2 np0 where denotes the binomial coef cient mn of distinct combinations of nelements from a set of size m . while this looks messy, in practice, the procedure is straightforward for eachincome threshold kreported by the census, we compute , the proportion p k of the relevant population below threshold k we compute , the hk information theory index of segregation between those above and below the income threshold k, for each threshold k we t a polynomial regression model through the points and we use the esti kk mated coef cients from the model to compute an estimate of fromrh equation .
this content downloaded from 155.247.167.222 on sun, 29 sep 2013 05 29 03 am all use subject to jstor terms and conditionsincome inequality and income segregation 1143once we have estimated the function from equation , we can h also compute estimated values of segregation at any desired threshold.suppose, for example, that we wish to estimate the segregation betweenfamilies in the top 10 of the income distribution and all others. evenif there is not an income threshold in the census data that correspondsexactly to the 90th percentile, we can estimate from the tted poly h nomial . for example, even though there is no income thresholdin chicago that corresponds exactly to the 90th income percentile, we cancompute the estimated value of from the estimated param hp0.370 eters of the tted pro le in gure 3. this will enable us to compute h and compare the segregation levels of well de ned income groups even when the census does not provide the exact information needed.
correcting small sample bias in income segregation measures one complication with comparing income segregation levels across metropolitan areas and racial groups is that evenness measures of income segregation are biased upward in small populations . this bias results from the fact that income segregation measures are generally ratios of average within unit income variation to total population income variation. when the number of households in a unit is small , estimates of within unitvariation will be biased downward, meaning that estimates of segregation will be biased upward. the bias can be substantial. when we take a random sample of 10,000 households from a metropolitan area and compare income segregation among the sample to income segregation amongthe total population, the sample estimates are considerably higher. giventhat census family income data are based on 1 in 6 samples, this hasimplications for comparing income segregation across metropolitan areas,years, and groups that vary in population size.
to ensure that our comparisons of the levels of segregation among metropolitan areas, race groups, and decades are not biased by differencesin population size, we adjust the estimated segregation levels for population size. for each of the 644 cases in our analysis, we draw 50 random samples of 10,000 families of the speci ed racialgroup and compute from each sample.
rh the mean of these 50 estimates provides a population size adjusted es timate of income segregation for each group metro year case. this pro cedure eliminates bias due to different population sizes by ensuring thateach of the estimates of are based on the same size sample. the rh this content downloaded from 155.247.167.222 on sun, 29 sep 2013 05 29 03 am all use subject to jstor terms and conditionsamerican journal of sociology 1144resulting estimates are comparable across race groups, metropolitan areas, and years, regardless of population size.
appendix b data and sample data comparability issues metropolitan boundaries and de nitions . metropolitan boundaries change over time. we use consistent metropolitan area de nitions acrosscensus years to ensure comparability of the results over time. we use theomb 2003 metropolitan area de nitions, the rst de nitions based onthe 2000 census.
census con dentiality procedures . the census employs certain measures to ensure con dentiality that affect the reporting of race speci cincome distributions. more speci cally, the census suppresses data withincertain geographic units when it determines that the population numbersfor certain groups are small enough to threaten the privacy rights of individuals or families. for instance, if there are only a handful of black families in a census tract, the census would not release the income datafor black families in that tract because it may be possible to identifyindividual families. in 1980 the census also employed complementarysuppression, which can lead to the suppression of other groups besides the small subgroup to avoid inferences through subtraction. we do not adjust our analyses for suppression, but because we include in our race speci c analyses only metropolitan areas with more than 10,000 familiesin that race group, the problem is minimized.
income . total income is de ned by the census as the sum of the amounts reported separately for wage or salary income net self employment income interest, dividends, or net rental or royalty income or income from estates and trusts social security or railroad retirement income supplemental security income public assistance or welfare payments retirement, survivor, or disability pensions and all other income.
we use family income data from the 1970 2000 censuses. we obtain tract level family income data by race for 1970, 1980, and 2000 from the geolytics neighborhood change database cds as wellas the 1990 data from the national historical geographic informationsystem s online data extract system .this was necessary because family income by race was not available inthe stf3 les in 1990, the les available in the geolytics cds. instead,the 1990 family income by race was in the stf4a les.
the census reports income for families and households. we use family income because the data are available by race for all four census years.
this content downloaded from 155.247.167.222 on sun, 29 sep 2013 05 29 03 am all use subject to jstor terms and conditionsincome inequality and income segregation 1145families are residential units that include two or more people related by blood or marriage. households are all residential units, including thosethat contain one person. thus, family income includes only those relatedby blood or marriage whereas household income includes the incomes ofall people living in a household. in the census bureau s compilation ofstatistics on family income, the incomes of all members 15 years old andover related to the householder are summed and treated as a singleamount. although family income is generally higher on average thanhousehold income because many households contain only one person, theuse of household or family income yields similar results in the regressionanalyses.
the census also changes the number of income categories used in each decennial census. for the total population there are 15 income bins in1970, 17 in 1980, 25 in 1990, and 16 in 2000. the income race bins are the same except for in 1980, when there are only nine income bins byrace. our approach to measuring income segregation is insensitive to thesedifferences.
gini index . the gini index is computed from census data using a procedure described in detail in nielsen and alderson .
covariates data and construction total population . 1970 2000 obtained from national historical geographic information system .
unemployment . 1970 obtained from nhgis 1980 2000 obtained from geolytics. we collapsed unemployment by gender and thencalculated the percentage of the population that is unemployed. thismeasure includes persons 16 years of age and older in the civilian em ployment force who are not employed.
age. 1970 obtained from nhgis 1980 2000 obtained from geolytics. we calculate the percentage of the population that is less than 18and the percentage of the population older than 65. in 1970, the under 18 category is actually under 19.
education . 1970 2000 obtained from nhgis. we calculate the percentage of the population with at least a high school diploma forthe population 25 years and older.
per capita income . 1970 2000 obtained from nhgis. in 1970 there was no speci c variable for per capita income, so we con structed the measure using the aggregate individual income variable.
foreign born . 1970 2000 obtained from geolytics. we calculate the percentage of the population that was born outside of the united states.
occupational industries . 1970 1990 obtained from nhgis 2000 obtained from geolytics. we calculate the percentage of the population that this content downloaded from 155.247.167.222 on sun, 29 sep 2013 05 29 03 am all use subject to jstor terms and conditionsamerican journal of sociology 1146is employed in the following occupational industries manufacturing construction nance, insurance, and real estate and professional managerial. this measure includes persons16 years of age and older in the civilian employment force.
family structure . 1970 obtained from nhgis 1980 2000 obtained from geolytics. we calculate the percentage of families that areheaded by females. we also calculate the total number of families.
residential mobility . 1970 2000 obtained from geolytics. we calculate the percentage of the population that resides in the same housethat they did ve years before as well as the percentage of the populationthat resides in a different house in the same county. these measuresinclude persons 5 years of age and older.
new housing construction . 1970 obtained from nhgis 1980 2000 obtained from geolytics. we calculate the percentage of housing built 10 years, 5 years, and 1 year before the census year.
this content downloaded from 155.247.167.222 on sun, 29 sep 2013 05 29 03 am all use subject to jstor terms and conditionsincome inequality and income segregation 1147appendix c table c1 trends in family income segregation, by race and income percentile, 100 largest metropolitan areas, 1970 2000 year group and percentile 1970 1980 1990 2000 change black  5 t h ....................... .101 .132 .188 .192 .091 10th ..................... .095 .125 .177 .176 .081 25th ..................... .091 .121 .163 .156 .065 50th ..................... .097 .128 .162 .158 .061 75th ..................... .102 .139 .177 .176 .074 90th ..................... .127 .171 .228 .230 .103 95th ..................... .145 .192 .260 .264 .119 white  5 t h ....................... .117 .145 .163 .173 .056 10th ..................... .104 .124 .139 .148 .044 25th ..................... .093 .101 .111 .118 .025 50th ..................... .100 .107 .118 .126 .026 75th ..................... .119 .123 .144 .151 .032 90th ..................... .178 .175 .204 .207 .029 95th ..................... .216 .210 .242 .241 .025 all  5 t h ....................... .134 .180 .208 .203 .069 10th ..................... .122 .156 .179 .178 .056 25th ..................... .112 .124 .140 .144 .032 50th ..................... .114 .122 .136 .143 .029 75th ..................... .128 .134 .156 .163 .035 90th ..................... .184 .187 .213 .215 .031 95th ..................... .221 .223 .250 .247 .026 note . segregation measures indicate segregation of families with incomes above the speci ed income percentile from those with incomes below the percentile. the sampleincludes the 100 largest metropolitan areas . for blacks, thesample includes 61 of 100 metropolitan areas with at least 10,000 black families in eachcensus, 1970 2000.
this content downloaded from 155.247.167.222 on sun, 29 sep 2013 05 29 03 am all use subject to jstor terms and conditionsamerican journal of sociology 1148table c2 estimated effects of income inequality on income segregation at various percentiles of income distribution, 100largest metropolitan areas, various speci cations, 1970 2000 percentile of income distribution model 5th 10th 25th 50th 75th 90th 95th model 2 ....... .076 .138 .292 .474 .639 .778 .837    model 4 ....... .486 .626 .782 .719 .849 1.074 1.156    model 6 ....... .133 .235 .400 .484 .631 .785 .840    all families . . . .155 .244 .387 .550 .789 .811 .756    white ......... .110 .164 .273 .462 .661 .611 .527    black ......... .259 .202 .263 .474 .565 .962 1.250    note . coef cients are estimated effects of income inequality on income segregation at the speci ed percentile of income distribution. bootstrapped ses are in parentheses. estimates frommodels 2, 4, and 6 use the sample and corresponding model speci cations from table 3. estimatesfor all families use the sample of the 100 largest metropolitan areas and speci cations fromtable 4 estimates for white and black families use the sample of the 100 largest metropolitanareas with at least 10,000 families of the speci ed group and use speci cations from table 4.
 p  .05.
 p .01.
 p .001.
references