economic segregation, race, and homiciden david eitle, montana state university stewart j. d alessio, florida international university lisa stolzenberg, florida international university objective. prior research assessing the association between structured inequality and homicides has produced inconsistent ndings, particularly in regard to establishing an association between economic disadvantage and black homicide rates. in this study, we employ a measure of the spatial distribution of income, jargowksy s economic segregation measure, to assess overall and race specific homicide rates. methods. using cross sectional census data and supplemental homicide report data across 166 metropolitan statistical areas, the present analysis usesnegative binomial regression models to examine the association between economic segregation and homicide rates. results. we nd that both economic segregation and absolute deprivation arerobust predictors of black, white, and overall homicide rates. however, an alter native measure of economic segregation, a measure capturing poverty concentration, was not found to be a significant predictor of black homicide rates.
conclusion. we suggest that further studies should consider the extent of isolation across the income continuum, instead of focusing solely on poverty concentration.
for much of the 20th century, criminologists have explored the consequences of structured disadvantage for understanding variation in urbanviolent crime rates. although the trajectory of this vein of research has beenguided by different theoretical foundations, different methodological ap proaches, and different levels of aggregation, a core thesis that unites this research is the notion that economic disadvantage is associated with violent crime generally and homicide specifically . although there exists some evidence to support the general argumentthat economic disadvantage is positively associated with homicide rates, theresults are far from unequivocal. while the cumulative evidence generallysupports an association between measures of economic disadvantage andwhite homicide rates, research has failed to consistently nd evidence thatindicators of structural economic disadvantage are independent and valid ndirect correspondence to david eitle, department of sociology anthropology, wilson 2 128, montana state university, bozeman, mt 59717 hdeitle montana.edu i. the authors agree to share all data and related information with those interested in replication.
social science quarterly, volume 87, number 3, september 2006 r2006 southwestern social science associationpredictors of black homicide rates . the inconsistency of these ndings is particularly frustratingto criminologists because of the theoretical importance of economic disad vantage for explaining the relatively high black homicide rates.
more recently, however, the spatial distribution of economic disadvantage, especially poverty concentration, has become the focus of several stud ies of violent crime .this work has been inspired by william julius wilson and his seminal work on the development of theblack urban underclass in america. although the preponderance of evidenceaccumulated to this point generally supports a core element of wilson sthesis , that indicators of concentrateddisadvantage are predictive of black violent crime rates, there is a majorquali cation studies employing a separate measure of poverty concentra tion have not produced unequivocal ndings of an association between poverty concentration and intercity black homicide rates. in the present study, we examine two different measures of the spatial distribution ofeconomic disadvantage poverty concentration and paul jargowsky s neighborhood sorting index in order to evaluate the predictiveutility of each these measures of economic segregation and their associationwith race specific homicide rates across 166 metropolitan areas. we examinethe foundations of each respective measure and suggest that poverty con centration may not be the optimal measure when it is employed to explain variation in race specific homicide rates across metro areas. we assess these measures predictive utility using 2000 decennial census data and supple mental homicide report data from the years 1999, 2000, and 2001.
background there are several different structural theories that explain why there should exist a positive association between economic deprivation and homicides , but three major explanations have emerged absolutedeprivation , relative deprivation , and, morerecently, concentrated deprivation disadvantage . it is this latter explanation,the spatial distribution of economic disadvantage, which has been the focusof several recent studies of the structural determinants of violent crime.
wilson s notion of concentrated disadvantage is an extension and elaboration of the pioneering work of shaw and mckay and socialdisorganization theory. wilson s core thesis is that twoforms of residential segregation in america racial and economic segregation have convergedin recent decades to produce severe social isolation among some blackeconomic segregation, race, and homicide 639communities. transformations to the economy, including restructured occupations, relocated industries, and the out migration of the middle andworking class residents from the central city to the suburbs, has contributedto the latter form of segregation . this severe social isolation is conducive to higherhomicide rates because of the lack of social control mechanisms to inhibitsuch behavior and the presence of factors that encourage it . included among these factors are a weakened labor force attachment by the isolated poor decreased opportunities to reasonable mortgages, insurance,consumer, auto, college, and entrepreneur based loans housing loss laxenforcement of housing codes leading to fewer quality housing options a weakened social stigmatization associatedwith arrest, conviction, and incarceration due to isolation from middle class citizens and disproportionate cuts in public services to poor communities because of the anemic political power of thepoor . kurbin and weitzer suggest that the lack ofadequate police protection in poor communities contributes to a mentalitythat supports the informal resolution of disputes because of the lack ofadequate policing services. the isolated poor also lack access to reliableinformation concerning the labor market, schools, apprenticeship programs, nancial markers, and so on . such information is critical for people to make wise decisions about their lives, their prospects for the future, and so forth . thus, wilson argues thatthe outcomes of concentrated disadvantage are both structural and social psychological . violent behavior is seen as both an adaptive and nor mative response in such concentrated disadvantaged communities and abehavior for which there are few and ineffective social control measuresavailable to prohibit. indeed, it is the notion that violent crime is an adaptive response that distinguishes wilson s thesis from culture of poverty theses that emphasize the internationalization of norms that promote criminalbehavior .
1 clearly, one major implication of wilson s notion of concentrated disadvantage is that poverty concentration can help explain the relatively highrates of violence in many black communities.2correspondingly, several tests 1for an excellent extended discussion of how poverty concentration produces urban violence, see lee .
2it should be noted that our review focuses on examinations of the specific hypothesis, derived from wilson s work, that poverty concentration is associated with homicides. other research that has been inspired by wilson s work, such as shihadeh and ousey s workexamining the connection between industrial restructuring and race specific homicides andbellair, roscigno and mcnulty s work on the local labor market structure and violent640 social science quarterlyof this proposition have been conducted. these studies can be categorized according to the level of aggregation being evaluated neighborhood orcommunity level studies that examine whether poverty concentration isassociated with variation in violent crime rates across neighborhoods,and intercity metro area level studies that examine the predictive utilityof poverty concentration for explaining violent crime rates across cities orurban areas.
studies focusing on the neighborhood or community level have generally found an association between poverty concentration and neighborhood crime however, these studies character istically are limited by examining only one city or metropolitan area at atime. however, among those few studies that have examined intercity or metropolitan area race specific homicide rates, the results are inconclusive one study has found a link between poverty concentration and black hom icide rates while another study has not. parker and pruitt failed to nd that poverty concentration, measured by dividing the number of racespecific people living in census tracts with poverty rates equal to or in excess of 40 percent by the size of the race specific population in a given city, was asignificant predictor of black homicide rates, although it was found to besalient in explaining white homicide rates only absolute poverty was ob served to predict black homicide rates. however, lee found that theuse of the p nisolation index as a measure of poverty concentration was a significant predictor of race specific homicide arrest rates across 121 centralcities. the isolation index employed by lee captures the probability that a poor black comes into contact with another poor person, regardless of race, in his or her same neigh borhood. hence, two different studies found inconsistent results regardingthe association between poverty concentration and black homicide rates.
furthermore, a recent study that examines the association between poverty measures, including the spatialclustering of poverty, and intercity violent crime rates failed to nd a directassociation between the two, although the authors did nd evidence of an interaction effect involving poverty clustering and overall poverty rates and homicide rates. unfortunately, the authors did not examine race specificviolent crime rates, so the question of whether the conditioning effect pre dicts race specific homicide rates remains unanswered. nonetheless, thesethree studies raise questions about whether poverty concentration exerts adirect effect on black homicide rates.
delinquency, are considered beyond the scope of our review because our focus is on studies examining poverty concentration and homicide per se. we are in agreement, however, withbellair et al. s observation that such processes occur prior to such structural factors as poverty concentration .economic segregation, race, and homicide 641economic segregation the use of poverty concentration as a measure of economic segregation has been challenged by jargowsky for largely methodological reasons.according to jargowsky, the use of a dichotomous measure of the spatialdistribution of income has a couple of important lim itations. first, it potentially confounds changes in the underlying incomedistribution with changes in the spatial organization. in other words, a shift in either the mean or the variance of an income distribution can move  households from one category to another , eventhough they have not moved from one neighborhood to another. second,the line that separates poor from not poor issomewhat arbitrary, especially since there is no adjustment for cost of living.thus, families that are de ned as poor in one city may actually have morebuying power than a similar family de ned as not poor residing in a citywith a higher cost of living. likewise, such a measure does not capture differences in the availability of bene ts like food stamps or other forms of assistance that may ameliorate some of the effects of earning below thepoverty line . additionally, the use of poverty con centration as a measure of the spatial distribution of economic disadvantageraises another concern using a measure with a dichotomous construct ofeconomic differences fails to capture potential homo geneity among neighborhoods for other economic strata than simply theimpoverished. for example, neighborhoods that are comprised of largely working poor may also lack the actors and the resources necessary to produce conditions of low homicide rates, yet a measure that captures only poorversus all other economic groups would fail to capture the potential crimino genic consequences of the structural conditions of such neighborhoods.
jargowsky recognized the limitations of poverty concentration as a measure of economic segregation in de ning his neighborhood sorting index. his measure is a correlation ratio, calculated as the between tractvariance of household income over the total variance of household income in the city. he argues that such a measure is more suitable for capturing economic segregation since it is based on deviations and is invariant withrespect to the mean and variance of the income distribution. furthermore,such a measure of economic segregation gives more emphasis to areal unitsthat differ sharply from the mean . . . this weighting is appropriate becauseoften the concern is with the most highly segregated neighborhoods .
our study represents an exploratory examination of the association between economic segregation and race specific homicide rates, controlling for other salient predictors. we propose that thismeasure, which is a more comprehensive measure of the relative isolation ofpeople based on income than poverty concentration, will have greater pre dictive utility in explaining urban area variation in race specific homicide642 social science quarterlyrates. however, it is possible that methodological concerns aside, both indicators of the spatial distribution of economic resources will have similarpredictive utility for explaining variation in race specific homicide rates.
data and methods the data used in this study are derived from two sources the 2000 census and the supplemental homicide report for the years 1999 2001. similar topast research in this area , we examineurban areas that have populations of at least 100,000 people and 2,000blacks. using metropolitan statistical areas that reported homicide data for the years 1999 2001 produced 166 urban areas for analysis.
3it is important to acknowledge that the examination of structural factors at this level ofaggregation may leave the ndings produced from these analyses inconsist ent with recent studies that have examined within city variation in homiciderates. however, there exist two reasons to examine these analyses atthis level of aggregation. first , jargowsky s measureof economic segregation is constructed to capture the relative distribution ofincome across neighborhoods in a city or urban area, like most measures of residential segregation. examining only central city data would likely lead to biased estimates of the association between economic segregation and hom icides because much of the isolation of af uence from the poor and workingclass would not be captured using the smaller geographic unit. second, thereexists some evidence that structural predictors of homicides produce similarresults across different levels of aggregation . nonetheless, we agree with ousey and augustine s sen timents that these analyses may be obscuring within urban area variation that may produce distinct differences in ndings assessing the association between structural measures and neighborhood level homicide rates .
dependent variables three dependent variables are analyzed in this study overall, white, and black homicides. overall homicides are the number of homicides reportedto the police over a three year period divided by three. becauseof missing data on the race of the offender in the supplemental homicide reports, we employ an algorithm that imputes the 3arguments have been fostered in the past about the strengths and weaknesses of using msas versus central cities as the unit of analysis for studies of variation in homicide rates. weuse msas as the unit of aggregation because of the nature of economic segregation itself the failure to include suburban areas where many middle and higher income families reside may confound any measure attempting to capture the spatial distribution of income in an urbanarea. however, we encourage future analyses to examine whether the same pattern of ndingsis maintained when examining central cities as the unit of analysis.economic segregation, race, and homicide 643race of the offender based on other incident characteristics .4the race specific homicides were produced by this imputation procedure and divided by three to provide an average over thethree year period. the averaging of multiple years of homicide data is utilizedto smooth out uctuations in the pattern of homicides and is consistent withmany prior studies .
independent variables economic segregation . we employ two measures of economic segregation  the neighborhood sorting index and poverty concentration. jargowsky sneighborhood sorting index is the square root of the ratio of the variance in household income between census tracts divided by the total variance ofhousehold income for a given msa.
5using this measure of economic segregation, if all of the neighborhoods for a given msahave the same mean household income, there would be no economic seg regation in the msa . greater values indicate that neighborhood deviations from the msa s mean household income are proportionately larger relative to the msa s standard deviation of householdincome, indicating greater economic segregation. poverty concentration iscaptured by the isolation index for poverty, as used by lee .
6it captures the probability of a poor person coming into contact with another poorperson in the same census tract. greater values on this measure representgreater levels of poverty concentration and the spatial isolation of the poor.
scholars have noted the deleterious consequences that racial residential segregation has had for blacks in urban areas, including the concentration of 4offender race was missing in 29.5 percent of the original cases considered in the analyses.
5 nsi sn sh pn n 1hn c3 c22yn c0 c22y 2 hs  ph i 1 yi c0 c22y 2 hs  where yis income, iindexes households, nindexes neighborhoods, hnis the number of households in neighborhood n, and hand nare the total number of households and neighborhoods, respectively. we employ the same assumptions and derive an estimate of total variance of household income for a given msa utilizing the same procedures as jargowsky .
6the isolation index is calculated as  p c3 xn j 1xj x c16 c17xtj tj c18 c19   where pnrepresents the isolation index, xjis the number of poor persons in tract j,xtjis the total number of poor persons in the msa, xis the total number of persons in the msa, and tjis the total population in tract j. indices for the race specific homicide rate models were constructed using race specific information.644 social science quarterlyblack poverty , female headed households, and male unemployment . racial residential segregation servesto attenuate social mobility for racial and ethnic minorities and the poor. aspeterson and krivo acknowledge, racial residential segregation sets in motion patterns of community disorganization and diminished socialcontrol that have deadly consequences for african americans. racial seg regation is measured by the index of dissimilarity for the city.it is the percentage of black residents who must move in order for the percent black in each census tract in the city to be equivalent to the percent black in the entire city. scores range from 0 to 1 with larger values representing moreracial segregation. the index of dissimilarity is commonly used to measureunevenness in the distribution of blacks and whites across a given area .
other measures . to assess the veracity of the association between economic segregation and homicide, we are guided by a three prong strategysuggested by phillips theory prior studies of homicide rates and concerns regarding multicollinearity. we provide both overall and race specific measures for most of the concepts.
7we examine three factors representing structural disadvantage percent of residents below the poverty line percentof families headed by females with children under the age of 18 and thepercentage of civilian noninstitutionalized males above the age of 16 whoare unemployed or not in the labor force . aprincipal components analysis revealed that these three measures produce high factor loadings, suggesting redundancy. thus, zscore transformations of each of the three measures are summed to form an overall index ofabsolute structural disadvantage , and two race specific indices of absolute structural disadvantage .
other controls incorporated into these analyses include whether the state is located in the south, percent black, percent male , the percentage of the population that is young , percent colleg e graduates , population density, and a measure of residential stability the percent of residents who have lived in the same residence for the past ve years.
8 although jargowsky notes th at economic inequality is controlled for in the nsi, we also consider the predict ive utility of traditional measures of economic inequality, both in models with and without economic segregationincluded, to assess whether it is economic segregation or simply relativedeprivation that is associa ted with homicide rates. the overall gini coef cient 7the denominator for the race specific measures is the size of the race specific population.
8the natural log of population density was also examined as a predictor but did not significantly alter any of the ndings.economic segregation, race, and homicide 645was calculated for the overall homicide rate model, while race specific gini coef cients were calculated for the models predicting race specific homiciderates.9table 1 presents the means and standard deviations for the variables considered in the analyses.table 1 means and standard deviations of variables used in the analysis  variable mean sd overall homicides 39.99 52.14 black homicides 21.94 38.27white homicides 18.05 24.11 economic segregation 0.44 0.10 racial segregation 0.51 0.12structural disadvantage 0.00 2.54 2.32 1.93 south 0.48 0.50population density 271.83 196.12percent male 48.91 1.04 49.01 1.08 50.32 5.54 percent 15 24 year old 15.19 3.24 14.35 3.64 17.31 2.52 percent black 12.88 11.89population size 12.81 0.87 12.54 0.88 10.28 1.38 percent college 14.39 3.84 15.73 4.15 8.67 3.33 residential stability 52.65 6.17 54.23 6.49 44.03 9.89 poverty concentration 0.00 0.97 0.980.75 economic inequality 0.410 0.023 0.410 0.020 0.456 0.034 bold indicates means and standard deviations for blacks, italic indicates means and standard deviations for whites.
9the gini coef cient is the proportion of the total area below the 45 degree line that lies above the lorenz curve, which plots the cumulative percent of households against the cumulative percent of household income. another common measure of economic inequality,the ratio of white to black median household income, was also considered in additionalanalyses and was not found to be a significant predictor.646 social science quarterlyanalytic strategy our dependent variables consist of three relatively infrequent occurrences total, white offender, and black offender homicides. osgood hasargued that a negative binomial model is preferable to ordinary least squaresregression because of the skewed and relatively rare nature of homicideevents.
10since we wish to evaluate homicide rates and not counts of homicides, however, we must convert the counts of homicides to the equivalent of a rate for each city. we employ the technique suggested by osgood and include an offset the natural logarithm of the size of the relevant pop ulation toconvert the counts to equivalent rates . finally, because regression di agnostics indicated the presence of in uential cases, robust standard errorsare estimated using the huber white sandwich estimator of variance.
results table 2 presents the negative binomial regression results predicting the overall homicide rate, the white homicide rate, and the black homiciderate.11the rst two columns report the results of the analyses predicting the overall homicide rate, with the rst model omitting the economic segregation measure. overall, six predictors reach statistical significance  structural disadvantage, living in the south region of the united states,percent of the population between the ages of 15 to 24, percent black,population size, and residential stability. consistent with prior research,southern metropolitan areas with relatively larger black populations, thosethat have greater overall structural disadvantage, and urban areas with lessresidential stability have higher overall homicide rates, controlling for otherfactors. the only surprising nding among the significant predictors was the inverse relationship between percent young and the overall homicide rate.
however, this may be due to fact that homicide is one violent crime that hasan older mean age than other crimes of violence.
12 10consistent with osgood and others, we employ a negative binomial model instead of a poisson based regression model because of the assumption of the latter modelthat all the meaningful variation is accounted for in the linear model.
11variance in ation factors were calculated for all the estimated models. serious collinearity problems do not occur when vifs are less than 10 . thevifs for individual variables did not exceed 5 for any of the models displayed nor did theaverage vif exceed 3 in any of the models, indicating that multicollinearity did not sig nificantly impact our results adversely. the correlations for the predictor variables used in the analyses of the overall and race specific homicide rates are available on request from the authors.
12the presumed relationship between age and homicides in cross sectional studies has been called into question previously, in large part because of the failure to nd a consistentrelationship between the proportion of young people in the population and homicide rates. indeed, land, mccall, andeconomic segregation, race, and homicide 647table 2 negative binomial regression coef cients from models predicting white, black, and overall homicides  overall homicide rateoverall homicide rateblack homicide rateblack homicide ratewhite homicide ratewhite homicide rate structural disadvantage 0.043nn0.034n0.071n0.074nn0.115nnn0.102nnn   south 0.218nnn0.225nn0.027 0.015 0.319nnn0.333nnn   percent males 0.060 0.071 0.050 0.049 0.004 0.009   percent 15 24 year olds c00.055nnn c00.049nn c00.080nn c00.071nn c00.076nnn c000.069nnn   percent black 0.021nnn0.021nnn c00.006 c00.005 0.000 c00.002   population size 1.054nnn0.984nnn1.067nnn1.001nnn1.070nnn1.008nnn   population density c00.000 c00.000 c00.000 c00.000 0.000 0.000   percent college graduates c00.017 c00.031n0.017 0.002 c00.021 c00.036nn   residential stability c00.028nn c00.020 0.004 0.010 c00.048nnn c00.041nnn   racial segregation 0.755 0.451 0.612 0.333 c00.889n c01.141nn   economic segregation 1.439n1.504n1.260n   constant c011.398 c011.869 c010.417 c010.521 c06.909 c07.012 wald chi square 1035.77nnn1226.74nnn990.08nnn1048.05nnn905.84nnn979.93nnn np c200.1 nnp c200.05 nnnp c200.01 .648 social science quarterlythe inclusion of the economic segregation measure  reveals that economic segregation is a statistically significant predictor of theoverall homicide rate, controlling for other predictors of homicide. in otherwords, metropolitan areas that are more economically segregated have higherhomicide rates than less economically segregated areas. additionally, theinclusion of the economic segregation measure also reveals a statisticallysignificant association between percent college graduates and the dependentvariable areas with a relatively lower rate of college graduates have a higher overall homicide rate.
an inspection of the models predicting the white homicide rate reveals a similar pattern to the ndings as revealed in theoverall homicide rate models, with a couple of important differences. in thebaseline model predicting white homicides , ve of the significantpredictors identi ed in the models predicting overall homicide rates remainsignificant and are associated with white homicide rates in the same direction.urban areas beset by relatively higher rates of structural disadvantage among white residents, southern urban areas, metro areas with relatively fewer young white residents, and areas having less residential stability have higher whitehomicide rates. however, one factor that was a significant predictor of overallhomicide rates percent black is not predictive of white homicide rates.
somewhat unexpected is the nding that the level of racial segregation is a significant predictor of white homicide rates urban areas with higher levelsof racial segregation have lower rates of white offender homicides. one possible explanation is what messner and golden referred to as a  relative grati cation reduced aggression explanation. in short, these authors extended the arguments of blau and schwartz , who sug gested that greater racial inequality could potentially bene t whites, bothmaterially and psychologically. in the reverse of the logic of relative dep rivation theory, whites being advantaged may serve toreduce frustrations and hostilities among whites, which messner and goldenargued would suggest an inverse association between white violent crimerates and indicators of racial inequality.
13 cohen , in their seminal study in which they reviewed the ndings of 20 years of research exploring the structural covariates of homicide rates, found that a minority of studies reviewed found evidence of a positive association between age structure and homicide rates  the majority of studies either failed to nd a significant relationship between the two or foundevidence of a negative effect between age structure and homicide rates.
13one anonymous reviewer raised the question of whether racial segregation can be viewed as racial inequality or not, especially given the relatively low correlation between it and theindicators of economic inequality. we follow the arguments of peterson and krivo, who wrote that residential segregation between blacks and whites is a pervasiveaspect of racial inequality in the u.s. numerous studies report high levels of racial residentialsegregation in u.s. cities and suburbs that cannot be explained by black white income differentials. additionally, see krivo et al. , who wrote but just as segregation disadvantages blacks in this way, it advantages whites by geographically buffering them from much higher levels of black disadvantage. indeed, at times segregation actually reduces theconcentration of white disadvantage. economic segregation, race, and homicide 649the inclusion of the economic segregation measure  reveals that it is also a significant predictor of white homicide rates citieswith greater economic segregation are likely to have greater rates of whitehomicides. hence, while racial segregation is associated with fewer hom icides committed by whites , economic segregation is associatedwith a higher white homicide rate.
the results of the models predicting black homicide rates reveal fewer significant predictors of the dependent variable than the overall or white homicide models. only two predictors the level of black structural disadvantage and percent young blacks were found to be sig nificant predictors of black homicide rates . racial segregation was not found to be a significant predictorof black homicide rates, controlling for other structural predictors. however,the inclusion of the economic segregation measure demon strates the utility of jargowsky s measure for predicting race specific hom icide rates. urban areas with higher levels of economic segregation have higher black homicide rates.
to rule out the possibility that the neighborhood sorting index is merely a redundant measure of poverty concentration, table 3 presents models thatinclude poverty concentration as an indicator of economic segregation in stead of the neighborhood sorting index.
14since the focus of this table is on the relative contributions of the poverty concentration, only that coef cientand the economic segregation coef cient are reported intable 3. the results suggest that for overall homicide rates, poverty concentration is not a significant predictor of the dependent variable. however, the inclusion of the economic segregation measure with the model thatincludes poverty concentration demonstrates that only economic segregationis a significant predictor of the overall homicide rate.
15 in regard to the race specific dependent variables, a more complex pattern emerges. for the models predicting black homicides, poverty concentrationis also not found to have an association with black homicides. however,economic segregation is found to be a significant predictor of black homicides, even when including it with a measure of poverty concentration. however, in 14as was the case in parker and pruitt s analysis of poverty concentration and racespecific homicides, we found that our measure of poverty concentration was highly correlated with both the poverty rate and the index of structural disadvantage . because of concerns about multicollinearity, and becauseour primary interest is in evaluating whether poverty concentration is a suitable substitutepredictor of homicides instead of the economic segregation measure, we exclude the index ofstructural disadvantage from the following analyses. however, parallel analyses that includethe poverty concentration measure with the structural disadvantage index were also conducted , with similar results economic segregation proves to be a more robust predictor of race specific homicide rates than poverty concentration.
15we also considered the overall indicator of poverty concentration instead of the racespecific measures, and found similar results as to those reported. furthermore, we alsoconsidered the overall gini coef cient in lieu of the race specific measures of economicinequality, with similar results as those reported.650 social science quarterlytable 3 negative binomial regression coef cients from models including poverty concentration predicting white, black, and overall homicides a key predictor variablesoverall homicide rateoverall homicide rateblack homicide rateblack homicide ratewhite homicide ratewhite homicide rate poverty concentration 0.122 0.080 c00.080 c00.107 0.235nnn0.192nn   economic segregation 1.396n1.574n1.351n   wald chi square 1055.69 1209.02 1000.57 1044.16 849.44 903.25 acontrol variables include region, percent males, percent 15 24 year olds, percent black, population size , racial segregation, density, p ercent college graduates, and residential stability.
np c200.1 nnp c200.05 nnnp c200.01 .economic segregation, race, and homicide 651table 4 negative binomial regression coef cients from models including economic inequality predicting white, black, and overall homicides a key predictor variablesoverall homicide rateoverall homicide rateblack homicide rateblack homicide ratewhite homicide ratewhite homicide rate economic inequality 0.026 c02.171 c00.489 c00.535 7.204nn5.154nn   economic segregation 1.843nn1.462n1.788nn   wald chi square 1024.21 1265.50 1008.57 1054.00 757.39 859.00 acontrol variables include region, percent males, percent 15 24 year olds, percent black, population size , racial segregation, density, p ercent college graduates, and residential stability.
np c200.1 nnp c200.05 nnnp c200.01 .652 social science quarterlythe models predicting white homicides, the use of the measure of poverty concentration or economic segregation may be somewhat redundant bothare predictive of these dependent variables. indeed, the addition of the eco nomic segregation measure to the model that includes poverty concentrationleads to an 18 percent reduction in the magnitude of the association betweenpoverty concentration and white homicides. nonetheless, it appears that iso lation by income and isolation of the impoverished both have predictive utilityfor understanding variation in white homicide rates. overall, these ndings parallel the ndings of parker and pruitt , who found that poverty concentration was predictive of white, but not black, homicides.
finally, in order to rule out the possibility that it is economic inequality, and not economic segregation, that is associated with homicide rates, table4 examines the same models as presented in table 2 with two major ex ceptions a measure of economic inequality is rst substituted for economicsegregation and then is included with the measure ofeconomic segregation . since the focus of this table is on the relative contributions of the economic inequality and economic segregation measures, we focus on those factors from table 4. a quick in spection of the models reported for both the overall homicide rates and theblack homicide rates reveals that the substitution of an economic inequalitymeasure for the economic segregation measure does not appear to be asuitable replacement neither the overall gini coef cient nor the black ginicoef cient are found to be significant predictors of the dependent variablesin the baseline models . additionally, the inclusion of the economic inequality variable to the models with economic segregation included does not degrade the strength of the association between the nsi andeither of the overall or black homicide rates. however, the white ginicoef cient is found to have a significant association with the white homiciderate. nonetheless, the inclusion of the economic segregation measure to thismodel reveals that both economic inequality and economic segregationpredict white homicides. again, the inclusion of the economic segregationmeasure led to a 28 percent reduction in the magnitude of the economic inequality coef cient, consistent with jargowsky s statement that economic inequality is controlled for in the nsi.
conclusion one of the great quandaries of criminological research is the lack of consistent and compelling evidence supporting an association between structured economic deprivation and homicide rates for both blacks and whites. our present research seeks to revisit this quandary. we evaluate thepredictive utility of two measures of the spatial distribution of economicresource jargowsky s neighborhood sorting index and a measure ofpoverty concentration controlling for other salient structural predictors ofeconomic segregation, race, and homicide 653homicide rates. our research uncovered a consistent relationship between jargowsky s measure of economic segregation and homicide, including bothwhite and black homicide rates. however, we failed to nd that povertyconcentration was a significant predictor of black or overall homicide rates,although it was predictive of white homicide rates.
explaining why poverty concentration is nota significant predictor of variation in black homicide rates is a somewhat dif cult venture, given thepopularity of wilson s thesis on concentrated disadvantage. nonetheless, we think it prudent to emphasize that the nature of structured disadvantage for blacks in the urban areas is unique and complicated. for example, sims found that higher income blacks are less likely to be spatially isolatedfrom lower income blacks than whites of different economic strata. indeed,pattillo mccoy claimed that a central tenet to wilson s thesis, theout migration of middle class blacks as a contributor to the development ofthe black urban underclass, is not supported by empirical evidence. shefound that the black middle class tends to live in communities spatially adjacent or close to those places occupied by more impoverished blacks. it may be the case that economic segregation more aptly captures isolation thanpoverty concentration measures because economic segregation is measuringthe isolation of people across the income spectrum. by focusing on just thespatial distribution of poverty, poverty concentration measures may not beable to adjudicate between metro areas where the poor are clustered but therest of the area is relatively heterogenous, versus metropolitan areas where themiddle class and upper class live virtually isolated from any other group.
although not highlighted in the results section, it is also important to note that the index capturing absolute deprivation was also found to be predictiveof black, white, and overall homicide rates. although this index is comprisedof three measures of disadvantage , the use of such an index is supportiveof recent research that is establishing that such a measure has predictiveutility for black and white homicide rates . in short, our research suggests that both the overall extent of disadvantage and the spatial distribution of income are associated with homicide rates.
16this is particularly compelling in light of the fact that very little research examining thestructural factors associated with race specific homicides has been conducted 16it should be emphasized that jargowsky s measure of economic segregation is a concept that is most applicable to large urban geographical units. one way of contemplating therelationship between economic segregation and measures of economic disadvantage at theneighborhood level is to consider how the distribution of race is measured. at the city orurban area level, race is typically measured by some segregation index , whereas at the neighborhood level, race is measured simply by the percent of black residents in the neighborhood. employing similar logic to economic segregation allows one to envision the compatibility between our research and research that has explored intra city urban area variation in homicide rates using measures of economic disadvantage such aspercent poverty.654 social science quarterlywith data from the 2000 decennial census. our results provide additional evidence that the index of disadvantage that includes family structurescombined with economic indicators is a robust predictor of homicide rates.
despite the compelling nature of our results, our ndings are best depicted as preliminary in nature. first and foremost, the use of jargowsky smeasure, while a pure measure of economic segregation , isbest seen as providing more evidence to a small but growing number ofstudies that nd that the spatial distribution of economic resources may be an important ingredient in understanding how structured disadvantage is associated with black violent crime. second, it is important to note thatwhile our research has established an association between economic segre gation and violent crime, we have not fully attended to the issue of end ogeneity. indeed, a core thesis of wilson s discussion was that the exodus ofmiddle and working class families from high crime areas within cities ex acerbated the problems of these communities, leading to surges in violentcrime in such concentrated disadvantaged areas. hence, increases in violent crime may lead to greater economic segregation at the city level. however, the result of such reciprocity remains logicallyconsistent with the core thesis that greater economic segregation inspiresmore violent crime. nonetheless, future research should attempt to modelthese reciprocal relationships to fully understand the relationship betweeneconomic segregation and crime. third, while our selection of msas as theunit of analysis is justi ed given the nature of economic segregation , such a unit of analysis may not be optimal for testing many of the other potential predictors of homicide rates included in our models, as hasbeen suggested in the past . further research should examinewhether the neighborhood sorting index is a robust predictor of homicidesacross central cities. and nally, our research only examines the associationbetween economic segregation and two racial groups .given the emergence of latinos hispanics as a large minority group in theunited states, it is important to assess whether our models including structural factors predict variation in these groups homicide rates as well.
references