j regional sci . 2021 61 162 188. wileyonlinelibrary.com journal jors 162 2020 wiley periodicals llcreceived 22 august 2019 revised 12 june 2020 accepted 16 june 2020 doi 10.1111 jors.12506 original article what do divided cities have in common an international comparison of income segregation paolo veneri1 andre comandon2  miquel ngel garcia l pez3 michiel n. daams4 1oecd centre for entrepreneurship, smes, regions and cities, paris, france 2university of california los angeles , los angeles, california 3department of applied economics, universitat aut noma de barcelona, barcelona, spain 4department of economic geography, university of groningen, groningen, the netherlands correspondence paolo veneri, oecd centre for entrepreneurship, smes, regions and cities,2 rue andr pascal, 75016 paris, france.
email  paolo.veneri oecd.org funding information gran sasso science institute, l aquila, italy ministerio de ciencia e innovaci n,grant award number rti2018 097401 b i00  generalitat de catalunya, grant award number 2017sgr1301abstract this paper provides a comparative assessment of income segregation in cities of 12 countries. we use spatial entropy indexes based on small scale gridded income data and consistent definition of city boundaries to ensureinternational comparability of our segregation measures.
results show considerable variation in the levels of income segregation across cities, even within countries, reflecting the diversity within urban systems. larger, more affluent, productive, and more unequal cities tend to be more segregated. urban form, demographic, and economic factors explain additional variation in segre gation levels through the influence of high income households, who tend to be the most segregated. the positive association between productivity and segregation is mitigated in polycentric cities.
keywords functional urban areas, income, international urban comparison, segregation, spatial inequalities jel classification d63 r12 1 introduction cities unite people of different cultural, ethnic, and s ocioeconomic backgrounds. within such a diversity, similar individuals often congregate and, simultaneously, separate from other groups. the spatial sorting of people in different neighborhoods according to their socioeconomic and cultural characteristics is an inherent part of how cities grow and acquire their struc ture. a long line of research shows how this process occurs and why . this process is not in itself harmful in terms of social welfare, and, in some cases, even desira ble to developing comm unities . however, many cities are truly divided with potential negative consequences, especially for the most disadvantaged people.
we call divided cities those cities where the combination of socioeconomic inequality, in terms of income, correlates with the concentration of socioeconomic classes in space. this combination exacerbates societal disparities and fosters a vicious cycle that potentially breaks the mechanisms of upward mobility for low income households, both in terms of income and neighborhood of residence .
a large amount of research has tried to identify possible negative consequences of socioeconomic and ethnic segregation in cities on individual and social outcomes . most of the studies target specific cities or a set of cities in a single country. in these cases, empirical analyses, often with a longitudinal dimension, make it possible to identify the long terms consequences of living and growing up in isolated and disadvantaged neighborhoods, which is generally more likely to occur in highly segregated cities. within this framework, the literature still lacks a comparative assessment of segregation patterns in different countries and world regions. there are very few studies providing comparative evidence on the prevalent patterns of spatial inequalities in cities as well as on what factors tend to explain the variation in within city spatial inequalities. notable efforts include the work by tammaru, marci czak, van ham, and musterd documenting socio spatial segregation trends in 13 european cities, as well as they studies by maloutas and fujita , and arbaci . in such cases, the number of countries or cities, in addition to the geographical scope of these studies limits the ability to delve into possible differences in the patterns of segregation .
this paper aims to provide an assessment of income spatial inequalities, that is, income segregation, in about 120 cities distributed across 12 countries. it does so by applying state of the art indicators of segregation based on entropy measures and by using a consistent definition of city boundaries an issue hardly considered so far in comparative studies on spatial inequalities. in addition, we carefully address the harmonization of spatial data to further enhance international comparability. our analysis sheds light on whether a city is more or less spatially segregated than another, what are the income groups that tend to be more spatially segregated and what are the city characteristics that are associated to higher levels of segregation, once controlling for factors that play a role at the national level. to our knowledge, no other works in the literature on the income segregation offer such a widegeographical scope and comprehensive assessment, while ensuring international comparability through common definitions and methods across countries.
our results show that segregation levels vary substantially across cities in the same country and they tend to be higher for the richest households, although there are exceptions in countries where segregation is lower. we investigate the factors explaining the vari a t i o ni ns e g r e g a t i o nl e v e l st h r o u g ha ne c o n o m e t r i c model where the main dependent variable capturing i ncome segregation is regressed against measures of city size, urban form, types of city government, and other city level socioeconomic characteristics. results confirm that city size and income inequalities in the ci ty matters for explaining segregation levels. larger, more affluent, and unequal cities are found to be more segregated, on average. a centralized urban form is also associated with higher segregat ion, whereas in polycentric urban structures productivity gains are less associated to increases in segregation.
the remainder of the paper is organized as follows. the next section introduces the data, methods, and definitions we used throughout the study. the third section provides an assessment of the segregation patterns in all cities covered in the analysis, documenting the overarching facts, and trends. the fourth section identifies the different factors associated to the degree of segregation of different income groups. the fifth section offers concluding remarks and defines possible further research questions.veneri et al.
 163  14679787, 2021, 1, downloaded from https onlinelibrary.wiley.com doi 10.1111 jors.12506 by tu delft, wiley online library on 29 01 2024 . see the terms and conditions on wiley online library for rules of use oa articles are governed by the applicable creative commons license 2 data and definitions 2.1 defining cities measures of income segregation, and spatial inequality more generally, can be sensitive to both the size of the individual geographical subunits and to that of the overall urban area under investigation. therefore, comparing levels of segregation across different countries first requires a consistent definition of cities. we apply the city definition based on the concept of functional urban area , see dijkstra, poelman, and veneri , where it is available and a close alternative in the other non organisation for economic co operation and development countries.
according to the definition developed by the oecd and the european union, a fua is a group of contiguous local units composed of a high density urban center and a surrounding commuting zone. to achieve consistency, the method first identifies urban centers as clusters of contiguous 1 km2 grid cells each with a density of at least 1,500 inhabitants per km2and a minimum combined population of 50,000 in the cluster. next, the boundaries of urban centers are matched to the local units where most of the population lives within an urban center. we call the resulting units urban cores. finally, all surrounding local units where at least 15 of the labor force commutes daily towards the core are considered part of the commuting zone  and they are added as a part of the fua.
this paper only compares fuas with at least 500,000 people. this ensures better data availability and that we discuss similar types of segregation for the entire sample. segregation in large cities can be characterized byentirely isolated communities by virtue of their size or geographic locations. while the mechanism of segregation is the same in smaller cities , the number of geographical units per city tend to be too small to allow for a reliable assessment of segregation.
1in south africa, brazil, and new zealand where the exact definition of fua is not available, we use the national definitions that come closest to the fua standard, metropolitan regions in brazil, metropolitan municipalities in south africa, and the metro area of auckland in new zealand. henceforth, unless a clear differentiation is necessary, we refer to fuas as cities.
the building block of segregation measures is the neighborhood. neighborhood is a catchall term with no consistent definition. this is not as much of an issue for single country studies where the neighborhood is whatever geographical subunit is available. however, we have access to large array of data, all using different units to report their data. no income data is directly available at grid level, but we create grids through apportionment . we use the term neighborhood to refer to the abstract concept of small geographical subunits for which data are available. we define a more precise unit of analysis below.
2.2 indicators of income segregation a large array of tools is available to measure segregation. researchers have developed strategies for operationalizing segregation in a way so that its presence could be summarized with ease to compare cities since the 1950s . since then, many advances have been made to capture different aspects of segregation. rather than provide yet another overview of segregation measures and their respective merits . the amount of information available about the spatial structure drops quickly for smaller regions. for example, corpus christi with a population just under 500,000 has only 92 units, several of which are very large tracts that offerlimited information.164   veneri et al.
 14679787, 2021, 1, downloaded from https onlinelibrary.wiley.com doi 10.1111 jors.12506 by tu delft, wiley online library on 29 01 2024 . see the terms and conditions on wiley online library for rules of use oa articles are governed by the applicable creative commons license denton, 1988 reardon, firebaugh, o sullivan, matthews, 2006 tarozzi deaton, 2009 we focus on how our methodological choices apply to international comparison.
our measure of income segregation is the ordinal entropy index applied to income data. the ordinal index weighs the concentration of individuals in more distant categories more heavily, which is important for income.
table 1illustrates the difference with a conventional measure of segregation. a multigroup index would produce the same index value for scenarios a and b . yet, theoretically, the greater concentration of lowest and highest income individuals in scenario a is distinct from that in scenario b. people at the extremes of the income distribution are more likely to share a neighborhood in scenario b and overall segregation is therefore lower in that scenario .2 we choose the ordinal entropy index because despite the continuous nature of income, census authorities report it as ordered categories . unlike more widespread measures like the dissimilarity index which are limited to comparison between two groups, the entropy measure handles the ordinal nature of the data and any number of categories. furthermore, we included data on the united kingdom and ireland, two countries that rather than income only report social class based on occupational categories.3 the ordinal entropy index is best fitted for categories with consistent definitions, school grade for example. in such cases, moving from grade 2 to grade 3 is equivalent to moving from grade 5 to grade 6. income categories rarely have this kind of uniformity of definition. the right skewed distribution of income require narrower categories towards the left hand of the distribution and wider ones in the right tail to achieve relatively even overall distribution within categories. for example, the difference between the bottom decile of the income distribution in paris and thetable 1 illustration of ordinal segregation index  neighborhood income category 1234 total scenario a 0 50 50 40 10 0 100 51 100 40 30 20 10 100 101 150 10 20 30 40 100 151 200 0 10 40 50 100 total 100 100 100 100 400 scenario b 0 50 40 30 20 10 100 51 100 50 40 10 0 100 101 150 0 10 40 50 100 151 200 10 20 30 40 100 total 100 100 100 100 400 note the table represents a stylized city of 400 people divided into four neighborhoods and four income categories of 100 people each. while the multigroup index is 0.198 in both scenario, the ordinal index is 0.277 in scenario a and 0.162 in scenario b.
2the index does not differentiate between categories. that is, if all individuals in the neighborhoods were in a single income category, it would not ma tter which income category they were in because the neighborhoods would be homogenous regardless . as a measure of evenness, the entropy index depends only on the relative distribution among the categories.
3the use of social class as a proxy for income has a precedent in comparative work on segregation . the correlation between social class and income tends to be very high and the implication for segregation similar. however, some caveats are required. some occupational categories, for example, self employed individuals who may have a fledging small business or own a successful law practice, can include many different levels of income. categories will also have much variation within them because of differences in experience level, for example. in the analysis we shy away from putting these countries on the sam e level as others but include them for reference and to add to the coverage.veneri et al.
 165  14679787, 2021, 1, downloaded from https onlinelibrary.wiley.com doi 10.1111 jors.12506 by tu delft, wiley online library on 29 01 2024 . see the terms and conditions on wiley online library for rules of use oa articles are governed by the applicable creative commons license median is about 25,000 the difference between the median and the top decile is 70,000. as such, equally spaced income categories would have many more people at the lower end than at the top, which often contravenes privacy requirements. the rank order approach estimates a continuous distribution using a polynomial function to transform the bins into a continuous variable. this method, however, performs reliably only when the number of categories spans most of the income distribution . our sample includes countries where information about the extremes of the income distribution is missing and where we use social class rather than income therefore, we apply the ordinal entropy index for all estimates.
the outcome values of the ordinal entropy index are between 0 and 1. the index is a measure of relative diversity with respect to the maximum diversity provided by the entire city. as most cities are income diverse, segregation arises when within neighborhoods inequality is lower than we would expect given the composition of the city. the maximum value of 1 indicates that all neighborhoods have a single income group and a value of 0means that every neighborhood has the same income distribution as the city. the actual values have no intuitive interpretation because they measure average uncertainty about the composition of neighborhoods . the interpretation is inherently comparative the values gain meaning when used to compare values across cities. a detailed technical description of the spatial entropy procedure is provided in appendix.
measures of segregation summarize spatial structure but are aspatial in that they treat all units as spatially unrelated. for example, if a city were divided into two neighborhoods, conventional measures of evenness would not capture the difference between a configuration where the two neighborhoods are adjacent and of the samearea and one where they are spatially distant and of differing size. we consider these two spatial issues as follows.
first, ideally, the data would be available at small, uniformly sized spatial units to avoid the modifiable areal unit problem . however, the spatial units census authorities use to disseminate data reflect rules that protect the anonymity of residents. the census authority usually uses population thresholds that must be met to constitute a unit. for example, census tracts in the united states are drawn to have an average population of 4,000. they, thus, vary in size depending on the residential density of the area. dense areas in central cities are divided into small geographical units low density suburban units can cover vast areas of land.
the second spatial issue is the scale at which segregation is measured. in treating neighborhoods in dense cities  and sprawling ones the same, segregation indexes ignore that these neighborhoods exist in different local contextual settings . a person living in the center of a low density neighborhood may be surrounded by relatively homogenous socioeconomic environment for several blocks and physical barriers before any noticeable change in composition. this extreme scenario is represented in panel  of figure 1, a large patch of homogeneity separated from the main urban area. in contrast, someone living in a neighborhood with same composition but that is part of a dense network of neighborhoods may experience a rapid succession of socioeconomic environments in the surrounding blocks, like panel . there is little that can be done to address the data issues tied to the spatial structure of cities . the spatial entropy can, however, mitigate the effect of the different scale at which the data are reported. that is, as long as the size of the squares are the same in figure 1, the index differentiates between structures.
the spatial entropy index mitigates the influence of both modifiable areal units and the contextual settings by creating new spatial units. the index is obtained from a set of uniformly sized local grid cells that are, in turn, based on the underlying census data . this means that we can apply spatial units at the same scale in all cities and countries. in contrast to neighborhoods which are based on administratively defined boundaries, the spatial units are the local environment surrounding any given point at a specified radius. in other words, if we had information on the location of every household, each household would be a point and the local environment would capture the composition of all households within a set distance from the household.166   veneri et al.
 14679787, 2021, 1, downloaded from https onlinelibrary.wiley.com doi 10.1111 jors.12506 by tu delft, wiley online library on 29 01 2024 . see the terms and conditions on wiley online library for rules of use oa articles are governed by the applicable creative commons license regarding the choice of scale for the local environment, however, there is no theoretical guidance. therefore, single city or country studies have defined multiple scales to track how segregation changes across definitions . we are, however, more interested in maximizing the comparability of cities across countries. comparison requires the additional consideration that, although our entropy measure of income segregation can be flexibly obtained across any distance interval, the outcome values may be driven by the scale of the underlying data. indeed, countries report their data at different scales. australia, for example, releases data at a finer resolution than most other countries. the comparison of australian data with france s larger units  would risk the equivalent of comparing panels and in figure 1. higher segregation in australia could simply be due to the higher resolution of the data. the magnitude of that bias is non  negligible . the spatial index mitigates the bias by creating a new spatial unit that is the same scale in france and australia. with reference to figure 1, we are using the scale of squares in panel to calculate segregation in . we choose 1 km2as an intermediate scale that balances the restrictions the data imposed. that is, the new local environment is large enough to encompass most neighborhoods, even in countries that report census results in larger units, but small enough to capture variation. we verify the scale dependence of our results figure 1 stylized illustration of different spatial configurat ions of segregation. note each square represents a neighborhood in a city with two groups of residents. configurat ions , , , and have the same segregation level when measured aspatially. that is, each neighborhood has only one group. the spatial index, instead, captures the difference in context so that is the most segregated because has the greatest physical distance between blue square and black circles. in contrast, segregation in is very low at the scale of the city. configurations and illustrate the possible limitations of underlying data. the seg regation index is 0 in both cases because this is true in the case of but in the definition of neighborhoods is not fine grained enough to capture th e internal segregation. source adapted from ejdemyr, simon, segregation measures in r, https sejdemyr.github.io r tutorials statistics measuring segregation.html .
last accessed march 19, 2020 color figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com veneri et al.
 167  14679787, 2021, 1, downloaded from https onlinelibrary.wiley.com doi 10.1111 jors.12506 by tu delft, wiley online library on 29 01 2024 . see the terms and conditions on wiley online library for rules of use oa articles are governed by the applicable creative commons license by calculating indexes at four scales . whereas there is variation in outcomes based on scale, the substantive interpretation changes little in terms of comparison.
2.3 data income is an imperfect measure of wellbeing and security, but it captures broad structural trends in spatial inequality. a challenge to measuring segregation across different countries is the different ways in which statistical agencies define income, which can refer to household disposable income, personal net income, personal gross or taxable income, and among others. table 2summarizes the source of the data and important summary measures about data quality and coverage. entropy indexes are obtained using data for cities across 12 countries canada,ireland, new zealand, australia, the netherlands, france, denmark, mexico, great britain, south africa, brazil, and the united states.
the average areas we report in table 2show that in many countries the average geographical unit is quite a bit larger than 1 km2, but this is largely due to areas at the periphery of cities that are outliers in terms of surface.
these areas are outliers, but we include them because they tend to have a small cumulative population and, therefore, have little influence on entropy, which weighs unit population. the method we use simply divides large units into cells and allocate the population of that unit proportionally .
the second issue of note is the method of collection. the complicated nature of income data means that they are often collected through surveys administered to a subsample of the entire census population or on a yearly basis to create representative samples over an extended period of time . most countries in our sample, however, collect income or class information as part of the census. this gives us greater confidence in our results as the sampling procedure can introduce significant bias in the index. reardon, bischoff, owens, and townsend found that the sampling rate could be especially significant where unit populations are small and when the sample from which estimates are drawn have a low sampling rate. this might be a source of concern primarily in the united states and brazil where sampling rates can be quite low. however, because we use segregation indexes that aggregate individual units, the sampling errors are reduced.
the definition of income is another source of potential bias. all the countries report household income, but some only provide total income which may not reflect disposable income.some countries report both total and after tax and redistribution income . based on these data, we were able to compare the segregation measure using one or the other and found a near perfect correlation of 0.99. finally, the united kingdom and ireland only report occupational classes, which we treat as a proxy .
a last potential issue that we face is related to discrepancies in geographic coverage. countries like the united states and the united kingdom make data available at a small scale for the entire country, making it possible to include all units within the boundaries of fuas. however, countries like canada, france, the netherlands, and mexico have more limited coverage. there is a trade off between coverage and accuracy. in the cases of canada, france, and the netherlands we combined the main geographical units with the next smallest one to create a morecomplete data set. the inclusion in the case of canada is unlikely to make much of a difference as most of the population is included in the census tracts counts, but is more important in the cases of france and the netherlands that have a strict cutoff for the number of people that need to be in a unit before income data are released. in both cases, the inclusion of municipal data compensates for the more limited data coverage.
in the cases of mexican cities, data necessary to fill in those gaps are missing. much like canada, however, the limited coverage is not too much of a concern because data cover most of the urbanized area and close to 75 of168   veneri et al.
 14679787, 2021, 1, downloaded from https onlinelibrary.wiley.com doi 10.1111 jors.12506 by tu delft, wiley online library on 29 01 2024 . see the terms and conditions on wiley online library for rules of use oa articles are governed by the applicable creative commons license table 2 summary of source and key measures country census authority avg. household per unit avg. area km2 income bins sampling ratea australia 2010 australian bureau of statistics 134 1.57 15 100  brazil 2010 instituto brasileiro de geograf a e estat stica 206 5.18 10 50 to 5 depending on city sizecanada 2011 statistics canada national household survey 2,007 4.25 13 25  denmark 2013 dansk demografisk database 1,674 9.2 5 100 from administrative record france 2011 institut national de la statistique et des  tudes conomique1,318 5.62 11 40 over 5 year period ireland b2006 central statistics office 321 0.27 8 100  irelandb2011 central statistics office 98 0.77 8 100  mexico 2000 instituto nacional de estad stica y geograf a 654 0.5 12 100  netherlandsc2008 statistics netherlands 1,637 2.82 5 32  new zealand 2001 13 statistics new zealand 906 3.07 6 100  south africa 2011 statistics south africa 189 0.79 12 100  united kingdomb2001 office for national statistics 109 0.37 8 100  united kingdomb2011 office for national statistics 228 0.35 8 100  united states 2000 us census bureau 1,693 19.1 16 15 united states d2014 us census bureau american community survey1,681 17 16 8 over 5 year period aall countries with 100 sampling rate refer to collection of the data as part of the census unless otherwise indicated. in all cases, the sampling strat egy is prone to bias due to systematic differences in response rate across the income distribution.
bfor ireland and the united kingdom, we use social class rather than income. the categories for ireland are a employers and managers, b higher profes sional, c lower professional, d nonmanual, e manual skilled, f semi skilled, g unskilled, and h own account workers. in the united kingdom, the categories are 1 higher managerial, administrative, and professional occupations, 2 lower managerial, administrative, and professional occupations, 3 intermediate occupations, 4 small employers and own account workers, 5 lower supervisory and technical occupations, 6 semi routine occupations, 7 routine occupations, and 8 never worked and long term unemployed.
cthe initial sampling rate for the observed cities is 32 of all inhabitants of the age of 15 or older. subsequently, household members are also added int o the sample.
dfor more information on the american community survey , please consult https www.census.gov programs surveys acs methodology design and methodology.html and https www2.census.gov programs surveys acs tech docs accuracy multiyearacsaccuracyofdata2016.pdf .veneri et al.
 169  14679787, 2021, 1, downloaded from https onlinelibrary.wiley.com doi 10.1111 jors.12506 by tu delft, wiley online library on 29 01 2024 . see the terms and conditions on wiley online library for rules of use oa articles are governed by the applicable creative commons license the total fua population on average. nonetheless, especially in the context of a country with large disparities and difficult to measure income levels, this missing data could possibly lead to bias and should be taken into consideration when interpreting the results.
3 comparing segregation across countries and cities 3.1 where is segregation prevalent  there is a substantial variation in the levels of income segregation across cities both within and between countries.
as depicted in figure 2, countries sort into two groups. one includes brazil, the united states, and south africa.
those countries have considerably higher levels of segregation than the other countries in the sample. their national level is between 0.1 and 0.15 compared with the rest of the sample which is closer to 0.05. in addition, while there is a correlation between the number of cities in each country and the variation across cities, countries like france and mexico have a tighter distribution than canada and the united kingdom.
in the case of the united kingdom and the united states, the data allow us to assess segregation levels in two points in time.4from such a time perspective, there is a noticeable increase levels of segregation in uk cities between 2001 and 2011 . however, such an increase originates from a small number of cities, such as leeds, liverpool, manchester, and sheffield, where segregation levels increased substantially. during the same period, segregation decreased in london and newcastle. interestingly, the uk wide standard deviation for the level of segregation across cities nearly doubled from 0.009 to 0.017. this indicates that cities have been following different patterns in spatial inequalities, resulting in a higher heterogeneity in income segregation levels.
noteworthy is that in nearly half of the uk cities segregation increased less than the national average and remained fairly constant.
figure 2 levels of income segregation in cities, by country . spatial entropy higher levels indicate higher segregation. source authors elaborations based on data detailed in table 2  color figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com  4the geographical unit for both years is not consistent, which introduces some bias. in the case of the united states, the increase is too small to be significant, but in the united kingdom the large increase reflects more than the change in the underlying data.170   veneri et al.
 14679787, 2021, 1, downloaded from https onlinelibrary.wiley.com doi 10.1111 jors.12506 by tu delft, wiley online library on 29 01 2024 . see the terms and conditions on wiley online library for rules of use oa articles are governed by the applicable creative commons license while changes over time in the united states must be interpreted with caution due to different sampling strategies in 2000 and 2014, the data show a relatively uniform and modest increase in the variation of segregation across cities between 2000 and 2014 . the variation in segregation across cities remained almost stable, as indicated by the standard deviation of segregation levels changing from 0.017 to 0.018. over the same period, 28 out of 62 us cities saw an increase in segregation, whereas 20 saw a decrease. the remaining 22 cities were stable, as changes in their absolute levels of segregation are negligible.
the cities in south africa, united states, and brazil point to the importance of history and inequality in explaining levels of segregation. many of these cities have among the highest inequality levels in the world as well as histories of segregation . in addition, in all three cases, income segregation intersects with racial and ethnic segregation in such a way that segregation levels are compounded .
despite high levels of inequality, segregation in mexico appears relatively low. some features of income data in mexico may partially explain this pattern. while the small area data covers most households in urban areas, there might be some gaps in data collection as surveys likely leave out the most disadvantaged. this possibility is supported by the new zealand data, which have measured how many households did not answer to the underlying survey.
these nonresponse issues suggest that reporting may be lower in low income areas. if a similar systematic underreporting occurred in the case of mexico, this would result in a possible downward bias. it might also be the case that mexico has a different pattern of segregation with respect to other countries. research on specific cities suggest that segregation, especially at the scale of the current analysis, is generally low among low and middle income households and higher among high income groups . this is consistent with the results discussed in the following paragraphs and suggests that mexico has a different pattern of spatial clustering of households in space with respect to most countries analyzed here.
cities in australia and new zealand as well as in denmark, france, and the netherlands have relatively low levels of segregation compared to cities in canada and in the united states . in contrast to the anglo saxon countries, these countries have low inequality levels, especially the netherlands and denmark. the similar levels of segregation across cities in these three countries suggest that the link between inequality and segregation is not straightforward, as documented by scarpa in the case of malm , sweden. while there is evidence that segregation levels tend to be higher in contexts characterized by high income inequalities, many other factors could be at play, both at national and local level, to explain differences in segregation levels across cities. the next subsection provides details on how segregation patterns change with income groups, whereas the following section analyzes more deeply what observable city characteristics tend to be associated with highersegregation levels.
3.2 who tends to be more segregated  the average levels of segregation of cities described in the previous section account for the way all income groups are distributed in space. consequently, those indicators should be interpreted as an overall measure of segregation patterns across all different income quantiles or, as roberto argues, a measure of diversity. however, such indicators may overlook high heterogeneity of spatial inequalities along the income distribution. the curves de picted in figure 3show how segregation levels changed for different income groups in three randomly selected cities per country.5more specifically, the curves reflect how segregated a specific income group is from the rest of 5while the cities were randomly selected, we checked against a larger sample of cities to make sure the pattern were representative of the national trends. while there are deviations, the curves are illustrative of the most common shape. in countries with only a few cities, deviations can suggest a lack of general pattern. these deviations are interesting in themselves and one of the goals of the study is to push for more research into the variation with in country.veneri et al.
 171  14679787, 2021, 1, downloaded from https onlinelibrary.wiley.com doi 10.1111 jors.12506 by tu delft, wiley online library on 29 01 2024 . see the terms and conditions on wiley online library for rules of use oa articles are governed by the applicable creative commons license the population in the city. the leftmost data point of the curves reflects the segregation of households living below the first income threshold relative to the rest of their city s population. the rightmost data point on the samesegregation curve shows segregation of households in the highest income bin from other households.
6in the case of the united states and new zealand, we show cities in different points in time, to exploit visually the time variation, when available. the figure reveals increased levels of segregation of cities in both countries.
figure 3 source author s elaborations based on data on income distribution at local level   color figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com  6in most countries the bin for no income does not exist and nor does the bin that would include all income above the highest threshold and is as such not comparable across countries. due to this lack of data the segregation of households at the lower and upper tails of the income distribution remainsunobserved for most countries .172   veneri et al.
 14679787, 2021, 1, downloaded from https onlinelibrary.wiley.com doi 10.1111 jors.12506 by tu delft, wiley online library on 29 01 2024 . see the terms and conditions on wiley online library for rules of use oa articles are governed by the applicable creative commons license overall, rich households tend to be more segregated than poorer ones, a pattern consistent with existing literature on specific countries. reardon et al. , for example, show that for several metropolitan areas in the united states, segregation levels at the lowest income levels are higher than for most of the population, but remain much lower than for the richest households. similar patterns have also been observed outside the united states.
floch finds higher levels of segregation for the highest income group across 12 french cities. one possible explanation for such patterns is that poorer residents might end up in more diverse neighborhoods than the richestresidents. people in the most affluent group have the widest range of location choices and, by extension, have a greater ability to live close to other people of similar income levels. the process of residential sorting that yields more homogeneous neighborhoods at the top of the income ladder contributes to the lower levels of segregation at all other income levels. as high income households bid up the price of the most desirable locations, all other household have to compete for the remaining spaces.
more detailed information on the income distribution, especially for the bottom income groups, makes it possible to analyze segregation patterns more precis ely. sharp peaks at the extremes should be expected when the category is very small. among the countries considered in this study, australia and south africa include an income category for house holds with no reported income. households falling in this category show extremely high segregation levels in the case of australia , where very few people have no reported income. when a very small g roup concentrates in the same area, this will result in high observed segregation. south african cities , on the other hand, have lower levels of segregation at the lower extreme, consistent with the patterns recorded in som e cities in the united states. however, south african cities have a different set of confounding factors. the category for no income is either the largest or one of the largest for each city, hiding much variation, especially when considering the significance of the informal economy.
figure 3 veneri et al.
 173  14679787, 2021, 1, downloaded from https onlinelibrary.wiley.com doi 10.1111 jors.12506 by tu delft, wiley online library on 29 01 2024 . see the terms and conditions on wiley online library for rules of use oa articles are governed by the applicable creative commons license while cities in nearly all examined countries have higher segregation levels at higher income levels, this does not happen everywhere. figure 4shows how segregation levels compare between the highest and lowest 20 of the income distribution in each country.7most countries show a consistent pattern of upper quantile being considerably more segregated than the lower quintile. ratios between these deciles are for most cities between 0.6 and 0.8. in some countries, such a s in france, segregation levels are similar at both ends of the income distribution. the netherlands and denmark two countries with overall low levels of income inequalities and low levels of segregation are the only countries where segregation tends to be higher for the poor than for the rich.8in these countries, the higher segregation of poor households might reflect the spatial organization of social housing. in t he netherlands, for example, social housing is sizeable  and, if concentrated in specific neighborhoods, can yield higher spatial concentration of the low income groups.
the remaining countries show a diversity of patterns, but also some consistencies. for example, cities in canada and new zealand show the lowest segregation at the bottom of the income distribution and then a steadily increase for richer households. french and australian cities, on the other hand, tend to have much higher segregation at the top of the income distribution combined with almost constant segregation levels for the other income groups. the united states falls somewhat in between with a steady, but steep increase from the sixth decile of the income distribution. over time, segregation patterns in us cities seem to have increased for almost all income groups, meaning that neighborhoods have evolved towards a relatively higher degree of socioeconomic homogeneity rather than towards more mixed patterns. there is more variation at the bottom of the income distribution from canada s steep decrease to the united states and australia s upward curvature.
figure 4 income segregation in the bottom and top income groups. in most countries, income segregation is higher among the rich. note bottom 20 values for denmark refer to the 6 percentile. source authors  elaborations based on national data on income distribution color figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com  7this approach is chosen to minimize the influence of data at the extremes and because all countries have data available at the least between the 20th and 80th percentiles, making the data more comparable. cutoffs are chosen by calculating the distance between the chosen deciles and the percentiles that correspond to each income bin. so, for example, if there is an income bin that represents 8 of the population and the next two bring the cumulative population to 15 and 26 , respectively, the first is chosen as the first decile and the second as the second decile.
8however, consider that due to the lack of data for these countries on the upper and lower ends of the income distribution segregation at the true  extremes of income classes remains unmeasured.174   veneri et al.
 14679787, 2021, 1, downloaded from https onlinelibrary.wiley.com doi 10.1111 jors.12506 by tu delft, wiley online library on 29 01 2024 . see the terms and conditions on wiley online library for rules of use oa articles are governed by the applicable creative commons license 4 what drives income segregation  we now turn our attention to analyzing the relationship betwe en income segregation and a set of city characteristics.
given some of the limitations of our data in terms of number of o bservations, time coverage and sufficiently large set of controls, results should not be interpreted as evidence for ca usal relationships. the tests still shed light on the factors associated with higher levels of segregation. to do so, we r ely on an econometric approach and estimate the following equation     se eln city size government economy demography country dummy year ,tt t t t jj j ttt01 2 3 4    where the main dependent variable is the log of the measure of income segregation .
we estimate equation using gradual specifications. initially, we consider a set of explanatory variables that is grouped into four categories based on previous empirical and theoretical studies. thereafter, we include additional measures of urban form and segregation and investigate possible differences in estimates for the poor and the rich. the definition of each variable as well as its source, often the oecd metropolitan database, is provided in appendix .
we estimate equation using ordinary least squares while pooling data for 107 cities in the years circa 2001 and 119 cities in the years circa 2011. the whole set of cities included in the analysis is reported in table 3.
those cities represent a smaller sample with respect to the entire set of cities for which we assessed segregation levels. the reason why not all cities were included in the regression analysis lies on the lack of the independent variables, notably for south africa and brazil, which are not covered by the oecd metropolitan database. based on each specification, we estimate two models these models either do, or do not, account for possible omitted spatial processes. possible omitted spatial processes are accounted for at the national scale through the inclusion of country dummies. at the consistent scale of countries, a one unit shift in each of the observed city level variables is plausible. we acknowledge that the dummies may absorb information about segregation effects in the case of the few observed cities that are the only cities in their respective countries, such as dublin and copenhagen.
4.1 the role of city size, government, economy, and demography the first out of the four literature led categories of variables includes population size to capture the relationship between inequality and city size. we expect this relationship to be positive as, in recent decades, relatively large wage dispersion has been documented for larger cities .
as is usual, we add controls for the economy of the city. the employment rate controls for the state of the labor market and, in general, for the level of development of the city . we also add labor productivity, which is related to the literature on inequality and city size . we hypothesize that higher productivity translates into higher wages, especially for skilled workers, leading to greater relative wage differences between skilled and low skilled workers. this increasing difference in terms of wages may result in higher preferences heterogeneity and in higher willingness for the rich to outbid the poor, therefore, exacerbating income segregation. this may in part depend on labor market conditions, such as complementarity between skilled and unskilled workers, as described in benabou . on the other hand, the effect of higher productivity might work also in the opposite direction, to the extent that an increase quality and quantity of amenities and public services becomes available for the poor following an increase in productivity and wages. noteworthy is that, when controlling for productivity, we interpret the density effect for a given level of productivity, and vice versa.veneri et al.
 175  14679787, 2021, 1, downloaded from https onlinelibrary.wiley.com doi 10.1111 jors.12506 by tu delft, wiley online library on 29 01 2024 . see the terms and conditions on wiley online library for rules of use oa articles are governed by the applicable creative commons license based on pendall and carruthers and tiebout s theory of spatial sorting, we also study the role of local governments. people sort according to thei r preferences for different types and levels of public goods provision. however, tiebout s theory has limited i mplications for the ability of people to exclude others.
income inequality means that high income households can not only outbid lower income households in municipalities with efficient provision of pu blic goods , but also devise strategies to exclude them . thus, the higher the number of localtable 3 countries, cities, and years country city year australia adelaide, brisbane, gold coast tweed heads, melbourne, perth, and sydney 2010 brazilaagreste, aracaju, baixada santista, bel m, belo horizonte, brasilia, campina grande, campinas, cariri, curitiba, florian polis, fortaleza, foz do rio itaja , goi nia, grande s o lu s, grande teresina, jo o pessoa, londrina, macei , maring , natal, norte nordeste catarinense, petrolina juazeiro, porto alegre, recife, rio de janeiro, s o paulo, salvador, vale do a o, and vale do itaja 2006 canada calgary, edmonton, hamilton, montreal, ottawa gatineau, quebec, toronto, vancouver, and winnipeg2011 denmark copenhagen 2013 france bordeaux, grenoble, lille, lyon, marseille, montpellier, nantes, nice, paris, rennes, rouen, saint tienne, strasbourg, toulon, and toulouse2011 ireland dublin 2006 and 2011 mexico acapulco, aguascalientes, centro, chihuahua, cuernavaca, guadalajara, ju rez, le n, mexicali, mexico city, monterrey, morelia, m rida, puebla, quer taro, reynosa, saltillo, san luis potos , tampico, tijuana, toluca, torre n, and veracruz2000 netherlands amsterdam, eindhoven, rotterdam, the hague, and utrecht 2008 new zealandaauckland 2001 2006 2013 south africaabuffalo city, cape town, ekurhuleni, johannesburg, emufuleni, ethekwini, mangaung, nelson mandela bay, and tshwane2011 united kingdom birmingham, bradford, bristol, cardiff, leeds, leicester, liverpool, london, manchester, newcastle, nottingham, portsmouth, sheffield2001 and 2011 united states akron, albany, albuquerque, atlanta, austin, baltimore, baton rouge, birmingham, boston, buffalo, charleston, charlotte, chicago, cincinnati, clearwater st petersburg, cleveland, colorado springs, columbia,columbus, dallas, dayton, denver, des moines, detroit, el paso, fort worth, fresno, grand rapids, harrisburg, houston, indianapolis, jacksonville, kansas city, las vegas, little rock, los angeles, louisville, madison, mcallen, memphis, miami, milwaukee, minneapolis, nashville, new orleans, new york, norfolk portsmouth chesapeake virginia beach, oklahoma city, omaha, orlando, philadelphia, phoenix, pittsburgh, portland, providence, raleigh, richmond, sacramento  roseville, saint louis, salt lake city, san antonio, san diego, san francisco, seattle, tampa, toledo , tucson, tulsa, washington, and wichita2000 and 2014 abbreviation fua, functional urban area.
adenotes countries that are excluded from the regression analysis because they are missing from the metropolitan database.176   veneri et al.
 14679787, 2021, 1, downloaded from https onlinelibrary.wiley.com doi 10.1111 jors.12506 by tu delft, wiley online library on 29 01 2024 . see the terms and conditions on wiley online library for rules of use oa articles are governed by the applicable creative commons license governments within the region relative to the total fua population, the higher the potential heterogeneity in local taxation schemes, which could foster the sorting of households in space, further pushing segregation.
finally, following galster and cutsinger , garcia l pez and moreno monroy , and pendall and carruthers , we controlled for city demography . the idea is that families in different stages of their life cycle have different preferences that might affect their location patterns. for example, young people with children compete for better school districts, leading to an increase in segregation. also, these households may necessitate more space and thus seek after cheaper land, separating themselves from older  households without children. while other socioeconomic factors play a critical role, inconsistent data availability and the scope of the study made it challenging to include these variables.
we now turn to our gradual specifications, based on equation and as shown in table 4, which we use to examine the association of relevant variables with income segregation. that is, in columns 1a and 1b, we first include the log of the city population as an explanatory variable. then, in columns 2a and 2b, we add the log of the administrative fragmentation index . columns 3a and 3b include two variables related to the economy of the city in log form labor productivity, measured as the ratio between city gross domestic product and total employment, and employment rate, measured as the percentage of city employment over total labor force. finally, the log of two demographic variables is also added  the youth dependency ratio, measured as the ratio between the youth population over the working age population , and the old age dependency ratio, measured as the ratio between the population 65 years old and over, and the working age population. all these explanatory variables areobtained from the oecd metropolitan database.
9recall that each gradual specification is estimated without and with country fixed effects, as reported in columns and , respectively.
results in table 4show a positive and significant relationship between income segregation and some of our explanatory variables. across the gradual specifications , we consistently find that the higher the population, labor productivity, or youth dependency ratio of a city, the higher the degree of spatial segregation. the coefficients for these variables, in contrast to administrative fragmentation, the employment rate and old age dependency, are both statistically and economically significant. noteworthy is that the estimated effect of population size on segregation levels initially fluctuates depending on whether spatial controls are included, in restricted specifications , but becomes stable after the inclusion variables that capture the state of the observed cities  economies. overall, the effect sizes obtained for the variables in the full specification are qualitatively similar to those in models and stable in terms of sign and significance.
4.2 the role of urban form following ahlfeldt and pietrostefani , combes and gobillon , galster and cutsinger , and pendall and carruthers , we also consider city size in terms of city density by adding the city land area as a control variable. existing research shows that density is positively linked to productivity , housing prices, rents, access to services, and efficiency of public services. simultaneously, some of these traits may also lead to higher income segregation. for example, according to ahlfeldt and pietrostefani , an increase in density leads to a decrease in net wages which is compensated by higher amenities. thus, the impact of an increase of density on income segregation is ambiguous and it depends on how amenities are evaluated by the people and how public goods can be replaced by private ones. then, we may 9https stats.oecd.org index.aspx datasetcode citiesveneri et al.
 177  14679787, 2021, 1, downloaded from https onlinelibrary.wiley.com doi 10.1111 jors.12506 by tu delft, wiley online library on 29 01 2024 . see the terms and conditions on wiley online library for rules of use oa articles are governed by the applicable creative commons license table 4 determinants of income segregation city size, government, economy, demography ln  dependent variable 1a 1b 2a 2b 3a 3b 4a 4b  ln 0.122a 0.062a 0.137a 0.065a 0.061a 0.052a 0.056b 0.050b ln 0.093 0.012 0.012c 0.016 0.010 0.014  ln 0.144b 0.154b 0.127c 0.203a ln 0.235 0.248 0.256 0.100  ln 0.400b 0.391b ln 0.044 0.066  country fe no yes no yes no yes no yes adjusted r2.063 .725 .155 .725 .585 .729 .672 .735 note about 226 observations . all regressions include year fixed effects. robust standard errors in parenthesis clustered by c ountry. a, b, and c indicate significant at 1, 5, and 10 percent level, respectively.178   veneri et al.
 14679787, 2021, 1, downloaded from https onlinelibrary.wiley.com doi 10.1111 jors.12506 by tu delft, wiley online library on 29 01 2024 . see the terms and conditions on wiley online library for rules of use oa articles are governed by the applicable creative commons license assume that wealthier households have a higher willingness to pay for amenities and public or private services or, at least, a greater capacity to pay for them. this difference in ability to access space can increase income segregation.
we also consider the role of different types of urban forms monocentric versus polycentric cities, compact versus dispersed cities, and centralized versus decentralized cities. these urban forms are related to different spatial distributions of jobs within cities and, as a result, they might be related to different residential location patterns. for example, mcmillen highlighted that subcenters in a polycentric city enjoy some of the same agglomeration economies as the central business district , but offer lower commuting costs and, in particular, lower housing prices for suburban workers. one possible mechanism at play is that lower housing prices allow households of different income groups to compete for housing in the same area and, as a result, we may observe more mixed locations patterns. thus, we may observe less segregation in polycentric cities . however, if there is also job segregation, with qualified jobs in the cbd, less qualified jobs in the subcenters and nonqualified jobs elsewhere, polycentric cities might lead to higher income segregation.
in table 5, we focus on alternative measures of urban form. the purpose is to test the effect of different types of urban spatial structures . in column 1, we include the log of the city land area allowing us to interpret the coefficient of our city size variable, the city s total population, in terms of population density. in column 2, we expand on the relationship to density by substituting the population variable with an explicit measure of population density. in both cases, results for the log of population and the log of population density show that a higher population density is also directly related to a higher degree of income segregation.10the positive association between city size and socioeconomic segregation is consistent with several other works in the literature . however, this association may be spurious due to the lack of small homogenous tracts in small cities where high density areas that meet the statistical standard to form a tract are limited . in this study, we take this possible bias into account by considering only cities over 500,000 inhabitants and by applying dasymmetric mapping to smooth income data at a regular and consistent size across cities. in table 5, columns 3 and 4, we test whether there are significant differences in segregation levels between monocentric and polycentric cities. we first interact the log of population with a dummy for polycentric cities in column 3. the polycentricity dummy takes on a value of 1 when the number of urban cores within a city is 1 according to the oecd metropolitan database. the results imply that the positive and significant relationship between population density and income segregation is related to monocentric cities . despite the magnitude of the estimate is muchsmaller for polycentric cities , the difference between the two types of spatial structures is not statistically significant. as a result, the abovementioned positive relationship between segregation and density applies to both types of urban form.
in column 4, we split the overall city population between central city population and suburban population . results for these variables show that the effect of a larger central population is not significantly different between monocentric and polycentric cities and is positively related to higher income segregation levels . a higher suburban population is found to be positively related to income segregation only in monocentric cities as the relationship between suburban population and income segregation is negative in polycentric cities .
10one may note that in columns 1 and 2, the estimates are positive and significant for both population density and productivity. when productivity is hel d constant, population density levels may vary with the underlying nature of cities. for example, at a given level of productivity, the source of this productivity may be in sectors that are associated with either centripetal or centrifugal patterns of agglomeration or density . this coherence between particular sectors and urban density can be associated with segregation, for instance through a channel such as the complementari ty of skilled and unskilled workers . we further examine the association of segregation with specific forms of urban density, monocentric and polycentric structure, below.veneri et al.
 179  14679787, 2021, 1, downloaded from https onlinelibrary.wiley.com doi 10.1111 jors.12506 by tu delft, wiley online library on 29 01 2024 . see the terms and conditions on wiley online library for rules of use oa articles are governed by the applicable creative commons license table 5 determinants of income segregation urban form ln  land area and population density monocentric and polycentric cities number of centers, centralization, and concentration dependent variable 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9  ln 0.044a 0.066a 0.036b 0.081a 0.075a 0.086a ln d poly 0.065  ln 0.064a 0.062a ln d poly 0.020 0.025  ln 0.011a 0.011a ln d poly 0.076b 0.067a ln 0.011 0.055c 0.010 0.008 0.006 0.010 0.021 0.027 0.029  ln 0.044a theil concentration index 0.118c 0.147b 0.168b average distance to cbd 0.008b 0.009b 0.009b number of centers 0.032b ln 0.013 0.013 0.016 0.001 0.000 0.002 0.009 0.010 0.013  ln 0.208b 0.208a 0.230a 0.234b 0.255a 0.195a 0.182b 0.214a 0.226b ln d poly 0.299b ln 0.106 0.106 0.189 0.167 0.144 0.023 0.069 0.075 0.096  ln 0.377c 0.377c 0.367c 0.386c 0.396c 0.373c 0.332c 0.329c 0.332c ln 0.076 0.076 0.078 0.141 0.148 0.038 0.045 0.043 0.043  dummy polycentricity 0.885 1.189a 3.844b adjusted r2.736 .736 .740 .750 .752 .719 .723 .725 .727 note about 226 observations . about 221 observations for columns 8 9. all regressions include country and year fixed effects. robust standard errors in parenthesis clustered by country. a, b, and c indicate significant at 1, 5, and 10 percent level, respectively.
abbreviation cbd, central business district.180   veneri et al.
 14679787, 2021, 1, downloaded from https onlinelibrary.wiley.com doi 10.1111 jors.12506 by tu delft, wiley online library on 29 01 2024 . see the terms and conditions on wiley online library for rules of use oa articles are governed by the applicable creative commons license finally, since the two types of urban spatial structure may also be related to differences in productivity levels, we include an additional interaction between the po lycentricity dummy and labor productivity . this interaction is significant and negative and, in absolute value s, higher than the coefficient for monocentric cities. overall, results suggest that cities with higher labor productivity l evels tend to have higher income segregation levels in monocentric cities , and lower incom e segregation in polycentric cities . one potential mechanism underlying the negative association between polyce ntricity and segregation levels might be lower commuting and housing costs in polycentric cities.
in columns 6 9 of table 5, we analyze the association of income segregation with other measures of urban spatial form. departing from the specification in column 1, we add a measure for the degree of spatial concentration of the population, the theil s entropy index, in column 6. the index is consistent with that used by tsai  and it is a theil entropy index computed using population values of all local units within a fua. differently from other indicators of concentration, entropy measures are more comparable across cities as they are not influenced by the number of local units within each urban area.
in the column 7 we added the average weighted distance to cbd identified as the centroid of the densest local unit in the core of the fua to measure the degree of spatial centralization of the population, meaning the degree of concentration of the population in the single main center both spatial concentration and decentralization are added in column 8 and, departing from the specification in colum n 8, the number of population centers a r ea d d e di nc o l u m n9 .s i n c et h et h e i l sc o n c e n t r a t i o ni n d e xr a n g e sb e t w e e n0a n d1 ,w i t h0 indicating perfect concentration , result s for these regressions show that cities with lower spatial conc entration indexes are related to lower levels of income segregation.
results for the average distance to cbd show that less centralized cities are related to lower segregation levels. finally, in line with the results in columns 3 5, a higher number of city centers are related to lower levels of income segregation. all these results clearly show that urban spatial structure measured in terms of the patterns of population distribution across the urban space and income segregation are deeply interrelated.
finally, in all regressions in table 5the variables labor productivity and youth dependency ratio keep showing a positive and significant relationship with income segregation. the only exception is the above mentioned interaction of labor productivity and the dummy for polycentric cities .
4.3 different spatial scales as a robustness check, we estimate equation using our income segregation measure computed at different spatial scales. this new set of regressions departs from the baseline specification in table 5column 9.
table 6reports results when using a segregation index computed at the 500 m spatial scale in column 1, 2,000 m in column 2, and of 4,000 m in column 3. we use an a spatial segregation index computed using the smallest available intra city unit in column 4. in all regressions, results are not significantly different from the preferred specification in table 4 and further confirm that cities with a higher population density, degree of spatial concentration and centralization, labor productivity, and youth dependency ratio are associated with higher levels of income segregation.
4.4 the poor versus the rich finally, we estimate equation for different groups of population according to their income level. the idea is to test whether the above studied average relationships remain as such across the income distribution and, in particular, for the lowest and highest income levels .veneri et al.
 181  14679787, 2021, 1, downloaded from https onlinelibrary.wiley.com doi 10.1111 jors.12506 by tu delft, wiley online library on 29 01 2024 . see the terms and conditions on wiley online library for rules of use oa articles are governed by the applicable creative commons license table 7reports results for the lowest income groups and for the highest income groups  using our income segregation index computed only for the 10th and 20th income percentiles and for the 80th and 90th income percentiles , respectively.
this new set of results clearly shows that the level of segregation of the poor is only related to the labor productivity of the city and to the degree of spatial centralization. on the other hand, the results for the highest income levels are quite similar to the average results and show that the segregation of the rich are  related to the city size , the degree of spatial centralization of the city, the labor productivity and the youth dependency ratio.
the econometric results in table 7further show that specific characteristics of cities in terms of size, economic development, demographic composition, and spatial configuration can explain the variance observed in segregation levels across different countries. larger and denser cities tend to be more segregated as well as cities with higher labor productivity. at the same time, cities with higher proportions of elderly population tend to have higher income segregation levels.
the econometric results here also show that the spatial configuration of cities can explain the observed patterns of income segregation. first, a polycentric spatial configuration seems to mitigate the association between segregation and density, as well as between segregation and urban size. second, cities where larger shares of the population is concentrated around the main center show on average higher income segregation levels, both in amonocentric and polycentric configuration. third, while a higher labor productivity is associated to higher income segregation levels in monocentric cities, the opposite relationship is found for polycentric cities. in our sample, after controlling for other characteristics, cities with more suburbanized and decentralized population have lower degree of income segregation, on average. finally, the econometric results show that income levels matter labor productivity and the degree of spatial decentralization of the city are related to income segregation levels of the poor and the rich. other above mentioned determinants are only related to the segregation level of the rich.table 6 determinants of income segregation spatial versus a spatial segregation indices ln  500 m 2 km 4 km a spatial dependent variable 1 2 3 4  ln 0.080a 0.107a 0.164b 0.080b ln 0.028 0.028 0.025 0.025 theil concentration index 0.166 b 0.175b 0.202b 0.159c average distance to cbd 0.008b 0.010a 0.016a 0.008b number of centers 0.027c 0.044b 0.072b 0.023c ln 0.009 0.020 0.035 0.005  ln 0.248a 0.197a 0.152 0.260a ln 0.118 0.021 0.033 0.106  ln 0.309c 0.393c 0.365 0.289c ln 0.047 0.039 0.003 0.058  dummy polycentricity 0.702 0.752 0.765 0.671 note about 226 observations . all regressions include country and year fixed effects. robust standard errors in parenthesis clustered by country. a, b, and c indicate significant at 1, 5, and 10 percent level, respectively.
abbreviation cbd, central business district.182   veneri et al.
 14679787, 2021, 1, downloaded from https onlinelibrary.wiley.com doi 10.1111 jors.12506 by tu delft, wiley online library on 29 01 2024 . see the terms and conditions on wiley online library for rules of use oa articles are governed by the applicable creative commons license 5 conclusions in well functioning and inclusive cities, people of all backgrounds, while physically separated, can access opportunities and high quality services that ensure socioeconomic mobility along the income ladder and, as a consequence, across neighborhoods of residence. while the literature on the neighborhood effect is still not conclusive, a comprehensive assessment of patterns of income segregation in cities can help framing future research in a more informed context.
this study has provided an assessment of income segregation within cities in 12 countries, trying to maximize international comparability. we found that within city segregation of households varies considerably across cities, even within the same country. this finding opened the way to identify regularities between the characteristics of cities and their patterns of segregation. results shows that the location patterns of households at the extremes of the income distribution, the most and least affluent households, are often reflected in the observed segregation levels. in most cities, segregation is driven by location patterns of the richest households, although there are exceptions in the least unequal countries.
our study analyzes the city characteristics explaining the observed variation in segregation levels. given the empirical framework and the data limitation in such an international comparative analysis, results should not beinterpreted as causal evidence. however, the results of this study allow to broaden the debate on how income segregation can be linked to different institutional, geographical, and economic settings, which could be taken into account by policy makers. our study highlights that the highest levels of segregation occur in large, young, and highly productive cities. in those cities, residents at the top of the income ladder might outbid the poor in a way that is more concentrated in space, triggering higher segregation levels. in more affluent cities, under the hypothesis that one type of social group is preferred as neighbors by all, see becker and murphy , highertable 7 determinants of income segregation poor versus rich ln  poor rich dependent variable 10th 20th 80th 90th percentiles 1 2 3 4  ln 0.079 0.063 0.115b 0.130b ln 0.016 0.038 0.011 0.002  theil concentration index 0.235a 0.173 0.064 0.065  average distance to cbd 0.010 0.013a 0.006c 0.008b number of centers 0.083 0.030 0.025 0.010  ln 0.043b 0.010 0.013 0.008  ln 0.361a 0.403a 0.261a 0.319a ln 0.011 0.080 0.040 0.029  ln 0.165 0.002 0.479c 0.527b ln 0.011 0.010 0.038 0.157  adjusted r2.762 .787 .659 .749 note about 226 observations . all regressions include country and year fixed effects. robust standard errors in parenthesis clustered by country. a, b, and c indicate significant at 1, 5, and 10 percent level, respectively.
abbreviation cbd, central business district.veneri et al.
 183  14679787, 2021, 1, downloaded from https onlinelibrary.wiley.com doi 10.1111 jors.12506 by tu delft, wiley online library on 29 01 2024 . see the terms and conditions on wiley online library for rules of use oa articles are governed by the applicable creative commons license competition for better locations might increase further the willingness of the most affluent to separate from lower income groups, further exacerbating segregation levels.
our results also suggest that those cities tend to have relatively large populations in their urban core. a relatively suburbanized polycentric urban structure, on the other hand, seems to show lower productivity levels.
this result might suggest that polycentric urban structures reflect an adjustment of the city to high congestion and land prices in the main center, combining the productivity advantages of density with lower segregation levels.
some of the city characteristics taken into account in this study are less powerful to explain differences across cities in the segregation of the poor. for the latter, there are several factors that might be at play and for which further research is needed. more specifically, land use regulation, transport, housing, and education are important policy domains that might be able to affect segregation and the capacity of the least affluent households to access the opportunities offered by the city.
our study also highlights the importance of advancing the measurement and understanding of patterns of inequalities within cities. methods for extrapolating entire income distributions from available data have made great stride, but hit a wall where data are unavailable at the extremes or spatially. international comparative research is an opportunity to harness the benefits of several data sources to refine methods for measuring segregation. australia, for example, offers detailed data over much of the income distribution at a high spatial resolution, which could support efforts to understand the correlation of income levels with the built environment.
in a growing number of countries, high quality longitudinal data on household income become available and represent an important source of information to understand the patterns of spatial inequalities within cities. this can also help to test some of the assumptions made in comparing countries that use different methods of collectionand lead to better tools to mitigate the influence of such differences.
acknowledgments authors would like to acknowledge the support by the gran sasso science institute, italy. miquel ngel garcia l pez acknowledges financial support from the ministerio de ciencia e innovacion , generalitat de catalunya , and the xarxa de refere ncia d r d i en economia aplicada. any errors remain the authors . the views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily correspond to the views of the oecd or of its member countries.
orcid paolo veneri http orcid.org 0000 0002 4640 5500 andre comandon http orcid.org 0000 0001 5296 5275 miquel ngel garcia l pez https orcid.org 0000 0002 0515 2922 michiel n. daams https orcid.org 0000 0002 5465 4566 references