income segregation from local income taxation when households differ in both preferences and incomes kurt schmidheiny  department of economics, tufts university, braker hall, medford, ma 02155, usa cesifo, munich, germany received 3 march 2003 received in revised form 4 july 2005 accepted 20 october 2005 available online 30 january 2006 abstract this paper presents a model of an urban area with local income taxes used to finance a local public good. households differ in both incomes and their taste for housing. the existence of a segregatedequilibrium is shown in a calibrated two community model assuming single peaked distributions for both income and housing taste. the equilibrium features income segregation of the population across the communities. the segregation is, however, imperfect some rich households can be found in poorcommunities and vice versa. the calibrated model is able to explain the substantial differences in local income tax levels and average incomes across communities as observed in e.g. switzerland. the numerical investigation reveals that the ordering of community characteristics critically depends on the substitutabilitybetween the public and the private good. the numerical investigation also suggests that taste heterogeneityreduces the distributional effects of local tax differences. the numerical investigation furthermore suggests that the rich community can set lower taxes when it is small.
d2005 elsevier b.v . all rights reserved.
jel classification h71 h73 r13 keywords income segregation income sorting fiscal decentralization income taxation local public goods 1. introduction decentralized financing of local public goods is a natural counterpart of decentralized decision about their provision. as oates argued, local units deciding upon public programs are more likely to trade off costs against benefits if these programs are financed by 0166 0462 see front matter d2005 elsevier b.v. all rights reserved.
doi 10.1016 j.regsciurbeco.2005.10.003 tel. 1 617 627 6394.
e mail address kurt.schmidheiny tufts.edu.regional science and urban economics 36 270 299 www.elsevier.com locate regeclocal taxes. fiscal federalism is intensively debated in the european union. on the one hand there are attempts to coordinate fiscal policies across eu member states. on the other hand,increased regional self government, as implied by the subsidiarity principle, calls for someregional fiscal autonomy.
i develop a model of an urban area with local income taxes used to finance a local public good. households differ in both incomes and their taste for housing. the existence of an asymmetric equilibrium is shown in a calibrated two community model assuming singlepeaked distributions for both income and housing taste. the equilibrium features incomesegregation of the population across communities. this segregation is, however, imperfect some rich households can be found in on average poor communities and some poorhouseholds can be found in on average rich communities. the calibrated model is able toexplain the substantial differences in local income tax levels and average incomes acrosscommunities as observed in e.g. switzerland. in accordance with the empirical findings, therich community shows lower taxes and both higher housing prices and a higher public goods provision than the poor community. this order of community characteristics depends, however, on the preferences for the local public good. the above ordering of communitycharacteristics holds for low degrees of substitutability between public and private goods.when the public good is easily substituted by private goods, the rich community exhibitshigher housing prices and higher public goods provision as well as higher taxes. the numericalinvestigation also suggests that taste heterogeneity reduces the distributional effects of local taxdifferences. the numerical investigation furthermore suggests that the ability of the richcommunity to set low taxes is higher when it is physically small. however, a tax haven need not be small.
following tiebout s seminal work, there is a long tradition of modelling fiscal decentralization at community level. the consideration of heterogeneous household incomes byellickson andwesthoff moved the focus away from seeking optimal community size to the study of urban areas with given community borders. while this strand of research wasfollowed by a large number of studies investigating local property taxation , there have been few contributions on local income taxation. hansen and kessler elegantly study a local transfer financed by local income taxes in a model with inelastic housing demand and an exogenous laffer curve.
calabrese studies local income taxation in a model similar to hansen and kessler s but with price responsive housing demand. konishi provides an existence proof for equilibria in models with income taxation under weak assumptions. he does not study the extent of incomesorting in the established equilibria.
multi community models with agents that differ in income typically predict perfect segregation of the population by income, i.e. households of the same income group live inthe same community. however, recent literature on spatial income sorting forcefully demonstrate that the sorting is very imperfect. rhode and strumpf show a long term trend of decreasing income sorting despite falling costs of moving. schmidheiny shows significant but imperfect sorting among movers in a metropolitan area. this clear empiricalfinding is almost completely missing in the theoretical literature. a notable exception are epple and platt who study a model with property taxation and show that the introduction of  heterogeneous tastes for housing indeed predicts a more realistic incompletesegregation of the population. kessler and lu lfesmann introduce two types of households with high and low taste for the public good in a model with local income taxation to establishk. schmidheiny regional science and urban economics 36 270 299 271equilibria with imperfect income sorting. keely attributes imperfect income sorting to the role of housing developers. hindriks creates income mixing by assuming that households have an intrinsic preference for either of two locations.
this paper follows epple and platt but introduces heterogeneous tastes in a multicommunity model with local income taxation and a partly substitutable public good. a similar model has been investigated by goodspeed . this study generalizes goodspeed s analysis both by introducing heterogeneous tastes and by using a realistic single peaked distribution of the population. not only does this single peakedness capture a realistic feature of urbaneconomies, but it also challenges the existence of equilibria in multi community models withincome taxation. the possible non existence of segregated equilibria under a non uniformincome distribution is shown by hansen and kessler . my model can also be seen as a generalization of kessler and lu lfesmann and consequently shares many of their findings. the main difference is the introduction of a housing market which allows me toestablish equilibria without the assumption of an exogeneous laffer curve of tax income . equilibrium housing prices provide a further mechanism for income sorting which is studied in this paper. rather than assuming heterogenous taste forthe public good i introduce heterogeneous taste for housing, for which an empirical counterpartcan easily be found. furthermore i introduce a continuum of housing tastes rather than just twotypes this allows me to study the role of variance in preferences.
while local taxation of property is widespread, especially in the united states, local taxation ofincome is rarer. local income taxation at municipal level is e.g. observed in four u.s. states , in denmark, belgium and switzerland. the numerical simulations in this paper are based on a swiss metropolitan area. switzerland is an exemplary case of a federal fiscal system and offers a laboratory for the study of taxdecentralization. switzerland is a federation of 26 states, the so called cantons. the cantons aredivided into individual communities of varying size and population. the roughly 3000communities form individual jurisdictions with great autonomy in terms of providing localpublic goods such as school services or infrastructure. these local public goods are financedmainly by local income taxes. while cantons autonomously organize the whole tax system, e.g.the degree of tax progression or the split between income and corporate taxes, the communities can generally only set a tax shifter in a given cantonal tax scheme. there is considerable variation in income taxes across swiss communities. for example, for a married couple with agross income of 70,000 swiss francs the totalled cantonal and community averageincome tax rate ranged from 4.7 to 13.2 in theyear 2001. within metropolitan areas the tax differences are smaller but may stilldiffer by a factor of 1.5 across the zurich area for example. fig. 1 shows the substantial differences in local tax rates, income levels, housing prices and the provision of public goods inthis community system.
1the top right map visualizes the considerable segregation by incomes in the zurich area. the two top maps demonstrate a striking relationship between income taxation and spatial income distribution the local share of rich households is almost an invertedpicture of the local tax levels. it is particularly interesting to see whether multi communitymodels are able to explain the observed tax differentials. note that municipality financing bylocal income taxation has been applied for more than 150 years in switzerland. this system of 1see data sources in section 3.1. considered are all communities where more than 1 3 of the working population is commuting to the center community.k. schmidheiny regional science and urban economics 36 270 299 272more than 3000 municipalities thus empirically contradicts nechyba s claim that blocal income taxes play no empirically important role qand that their virtual inexistence in the united states proofs bproperty taxes a dominant tax strategy for local governments q.
the paper is organized as follows. section 2 introduces the formal model and derives the properties of the household utility function which induce segregation of the population. in thefirst part of section 3 the calibration used for the numerical investigation of the equilibrium is described. in the middle part of section 3 the numerical equilibrium is presented and the welfare implications of the decentralized decision making are discussed. the remainder of section 3 discusses the robustness of the result to changes in the calibrated parameters. section 4 draws conclusions.
2. the model the model economy is divided into jdistinct communities. the area is populated by a continuum of heterogeneous households, which differ in both income ya   y,y , 0b  y,y bl, and a parameter aa 0,1 describing their taste for housing. incomes and tastes are jointly distributed according to the density function fn0. there are three goods in the economy a compositelocal average income tax rate share of households with income married couple, taxable income 70,000 chf above chf 75,000  4.7 5.0 5.1 5.5 5.6 6.0 6.1 6.5 6.6 7.0 7.1 7.50.25 0.30 0.31 0.35 0.36 0.40 0.41 0.45 0.46 0.50 0.51 0.55 0.56 0.60 rental price for housing, public expenditures 1997 chf per annum and m2 in chf per taxpayer 181 200 201 220 221 240 241 260 261 2801874 2000 2001 2500 2501 3000 3001 3500 3501 4000 4001 4500 4501 5000 5001 5500 fig. 1. community characteristics in the metropolitan area of zurich.k. schmidheiny regional science and urban economics 36 270 299 273private consumption b, housing hand a local public good g.2the latter is local in the sense that it is only consumed by the residents of a community.
a household can move costlessly and chooses the community in which its utility is maximized as place of residence. each community indexed by jcan individually set the amount of the local public good gjand the local income tax rate tja 0,1 . these decisions are made in a majority rule vote by the residents respecting budget balance in the community. each community has a fixed amount of land ljfrom which housing stock is produced. all households are renters and the housing stock is owned by an absentee landlord. the price for housing pjin community j is determined in a competitive housing market. the private good is considered the numeraire. acommunity jis fully characterised by the triple . the set of all possible community characteristics is given by c 0 1 c138 c2 r c2r . location choice, voting and the resulting community characteristics are simultaneously determined in the general equilibrium.
2.1. households the preferences of the households are described by a stone geary utility function  uh b g a alnh c0bh 1 c0a lnb c0bb clng c0bg c0 c1   where his the consumption of housing, bthe consumption of the private good and gthe consumption of the publicly provided good. bhn0,bbn0 and bgare sometimes referred to as existential needs for housing, private good and public good, respectively. the parameter aa 0,1 describes the households taste for housing, as will become apparent below.
households face a budget constraint  ph bvy1 c0t  where pis the price of housing and t the local income tax. note that the price of the private good is set to unity. maximisation of the utility function with respect to handbsubject to the budget constraint yields the housing demand function h4 ht p g y a ay1 c0t c0 pbh c0bb c138 p bh and the demand for the private good b y c0ph . both demand functions are linear functions of after tax income y, reflecting the fact that stone geary utility implies a linear expenditure system and vice versa . housing demand is increasing in aas long as the household can satisfy its existential needs, i.e. b  bn0 iff ynpbh bbn0.a 0 implies that the housing demand is equal to the existential needs and hence does not change with household income. a 1 denotes a household which spends all extra income on housing after paying his existential need.
the indirect utility vt p g y a uh4 b4 g a c0 c1 gives the utility of a household with income yand preference parameter ain a community with income tax t, housing prices pand a public good provision g.
2see section 2.4 for a discussion of the nature of the public good.k. schmidheiny regional science and urban economics 36 270 299 2742.2. location choice households take the community characteristics as given when they choose their place of residence. they value the different communities by their local tax rates tj, housing prices pjand public good provision gj. a household chooses to locate in the community in which its utility is maximal. a household chooses jif and only if vt j pj gj y a c0 c1 zvt i pi gi y a for all i 1  an important feature of this model is that households have to value the communities with respect to 3 dimensions of community characteristics. in previously studied multicommunity models, communities are fully described by 2 dimensions only. in models with localproperty taxes , the households only care about after tax housing prices p and not about pand tindependently. income tax models usually abstract from a housing m arket and fully characterize the communities by local taxes tand public goods or transfers g.
3the 3 dimensional characteristics space allows for a much richer structure of potential equilibria. e.g. it is conceivable that acommunity with both higher taxes and higher housing prices than any other community canattract residents by offering more public goods.
4 i will now show how the assumed household preferences lead to spatial segregation of the population. before describing the allocation of households across communities in propositions 1and 2, i explicitly state the specific properties of the assumed utility function that generate spatial segregation. property 1 is trivial properties 2 and 3 are a direct consequence of the specified utility function assuming that existential needs are strictly satisfied, i.e. ynpb h bbn0 and gnbg. the derivation is provided in appendix a .
property 1 .for all t p g y a ac c2r c20 1 c138 mg tt p g y a dg dt c12 c12 c12 c12 dv 0 dp 0n0  mg pt p g y a dg dp c12 c12 c12 c12 dv 0 dt 0n0  mt pt p g y a dt dp c12 c12 c12 c12 dv 0 dg 0b0  property 1 signs the marginal rate of substitution m, between each pair of community characteristics. property 1 states that a household can be compensated for a tax increase either bymore public good provision or by lower housing prices. westhoff calls this trade off the relative preference for the public good. property 1 also states that a household is compensated for higher housing prices by more public good provision. property 1 holds under the standardassumption about the influence of prices, taxes and public goods on the household s well beingand is not specific to stone geary utility.
3the reduction to a 2 dimensional characteristic space simplifies the analysis fundamentally. an exception is goodspeed who studies the 3 dimensional characteristic space. however, goodspeed seems not to detect the implied technical difficulties .
4examples of such equilibria are shown in section 3.6.k. schmidheiny regional science and urban economics 36 270 299 275property 2 .
for all t p g y ac c2r and any aa 0, 1 , bmg t byb0a n dbmg p byb0  for all t p g a ac c20 1 c138 and any y ar , bmg p ban0 andbmt p bab0  property 2 shows that the relative preference for community characteristics changes monotonically with both income and taste. property 2a reveals that rich households need more public good compensation than poor households for the same increase in taxes or prices.5property 2b states that households with a strong taste for housing need a smaller increase in public good provision or a larger decrease in tax rates to be compensated for a price increase than householdswith weak taste for housing. property 2 explains why different households choose differentlocations in equilibrium. it is equivalent to the spence mirrless condition in informationeconomics. property 2 is a consequence of the non homothetic nature of stone gearypreferences. bm g,p byb0 is shared with ellickson ,westhoff ,epple et al.
 andgoodspeed . property bmg,t byb0 is shared with goodspeed  .6property 2 b introduces preference heterogeneity similar to epple and platt .
property 3 .
for all t p g y ac c2r and any given aa 0, 1 ,both bmg t by bmg p byandbmt g by bmt p by are independent of y, where m t,g 1 m g,t.
for all ac c2 0, 1 and any given y ar , bmg t ba 0  the first part of property 3a states that the ratio of the income effects on the g c0ttrade off and on the g c0ptrade off is independent of the income level. it is insightful to describe this property in terms of discrete changes. consider an increase in local taxes by d t. the tax increase is compensated by dtg of public goods. an increase of local housing prices by d pis compensated by another amount dpg of public goods. both compensations decrease with a  increase in income y dydtg dtg c0dtgb0, dydpg dpg c0dpgb0. the first part of property 3a states now that the ratio dydtg  dydpgof the income effects on the two compensations is constant w.r.t. to income. the second 5note that bmt,p bycannot be signed because the marginal rate of substitution between tax and housing price, mt,p, decreases with income if en1 and increases if eb1.
6goodspeed shows that bmg,p byb0 is equivalent to eg,y eg,pneh,y, where eg,pgis the price elasticity of demand for the public good and eh,yis the income elasticity of demand for housing. goodspeed also shows that bmg,t byb0 is equivalent to eg,y eg,pn1, where eg,yis the income elasticity of public goods demand. he points to empirical evidence that shows that both assumptions are reasonable.k. schmidheiny regional science and urban economics 36 270 299 276part of property 3a is explained analogously. property 3b states that the g c0ttrade off is independent of housing preferences a. property 3b is a stronger version of property 3a. property 3 is another feature of the assumed stone geary utility but considerably less intuitive than thefirst two properties. it results from both the linear expenditure system and the additiveseparability between gand . property 3 is important as it rules out intractable segregation patterns where the middle income class prefers one community while rich andpoor households prefer another community .
7 the distribution of the households across communities implied by properties 2 and 3 is described in the following paragraphs. a first observation is that all households are indifferentbetween all communities when the communities have identical community characteristics, i.e. for all j,i. in this case the households settle such that communities have the same income distribution.
the following lemma and propositions describe how the utility maximizing households will be allocated across communities.
lemma 1 .consider the subpopulation with taste a. if a household with income y vprefers to live in community j and another household with income y wnyvprefers to live in community i, then there is a dborder thousehold with income y ji, yvvy jivyw, which is indifferent between the two communities.
proof. the household with income yvprefers jtoi, hence vj c0viv0, where vj  v. the opposite is true for a household with income yw, thus vj c0viv0.
vj c0vi is continuous in yasvis continuous in y. the intermediate value theorem implies that there is at least one y jibetween yvandyws.t.vj c0vi 0. the existence of y jifollows from fn0. 5 the set of dborder thouseholds is described by the function y ji. equivalently, the set of border households is described by the inverse function a ji, implicitly defined by vj vi .
definition 1 . an allocation of households is called conditionally segregated by incomes if the jsets ij y household with income yand taste aprefers community j satisfy  ijis an interval for all j,  ij ii for all ipj,  i1v ...vij y,y  for any aand for any j ijp for at least one a.
definition 1 means that in a subpopulation with equal tastes, any community is populated by a single and distinct income class.
proposition 1 .when the household preferences are described by a stone geary utility function and all j communities exhibit distinct characteristics, 7it seems difficult to justify either property 3a or property 3 b empirically. goodspeed seems to derive perfect income segregation without property 3 in the same setting. however, the graphical proof he provides in goodspeed is incomplete. goodspeed uses the stone geary utility function for numerical simulations and fails to detect the missing assumption.k. schmidheiny regional science and urban economics 36 270 299 277p for all i pj, then the allocation of households is conditionally segregated by incomes.
proof. the proof uses the fact that the utility difference vj c0vi v c0 v between community jandiis strictly monotonic in y  signbvj c0vi c0 c1 by signpjbh bb 1 c0tj c0pibh bb 1 c0ti c18 c19   consider three households with income yvbywbyjrespectively and suppose that the allocation of households does not satisfy definition 1 yvas well as yjprefer community j, but ywstrictly prefers community i. given the location preference of yvand yj, it follows from lemma 1 that there is an indifferent household y ,yvvy byw. the above sign condition implies that all households richer than y , i.e. yj, also prefer i, which is a contradiction. 5 schmidheiny shows that the properties 1 2a to 3a are sufficient conditions for income segregation.
definition 2 . an allocation of households is called conditionally segregated by tastes if the jsetsij a household with income yand taste a prefers community j satisfy  ijis an interval for all j,  ij ij , for all ipj,  i1v ...vij 0,1  for any yand for any j ijp for at least one y.
definition 2 means that in a subpopulation with equal incomes, any community is populated by a single and distinct interval of tastes.
proposition 2 .when the household preferences are described by a stone geary utility function and all j commun ities exhibit distinct characteristics, p for all i pj, then the allocation of households is conditionally segregated by tastes. households in communities with lower housing prices have stronger tastes for housingthan households in communities with higher housing prices.
proof. the proof of the first sentence is analogous to proposition 1 using the sign condition sign ba sign . second sentence consider pibpjand a household which is indifferent between the two communities jandi, hence vj vi. then any household with the same income yand taste parameter ana prefers community i, i.e. vjbvi, since b bab0i fpibpj. 5 propositions 1 and 2 offer two ways of calculating a community s population  nj z1 0zyp ja  ypja fy a dyda zyp ypzap jy  apjy fy a dady  wherepyj and y j are the lowest and highest income in community jgiven the subpopulation with taste a.
pyj is given by the locus of indifferent households y jibetween community jandk. schmidheiny regional science and urban economics 36 270 299 278itsdadjacent tcommunity iwith lower income households. the other boundaries y j,paj and a j are given analogously. closed form expressions for these boundaries are given in appendix a. note that the adjacent community might not be the same for all subpopulations. this isdemonstrated in fig. 2 showing four examples of possible segregation patterns in the case of three populated communities.
2.3. housing market within each community housing is produced from land and non land factors. the housing supply in each community jis assumed to be an increasing function of the housing price p jand the land dedicated to housing lj. the housing supply function hs j ljdph j is adopted from epple and romer , who derived it from an explicit housing production function his the ratio of non land to land input.
the aggregate housing demand in community jis hd j z1 0zyp ja  ypja htj pj gj y a c0 c1 fy a dyda  in equilibrium, the price for housing in community jclears the housing market hd j hs j 2 1 2 3 1 231 12 2 33taste taste taste  taste income y income y income y income y fig. 2. examples of segregation patterns in the three community case. the areas denoted by d1t,d2tand d3tshow the attributes of the households that prefer community 1, 2 or 3, respectively.k. schmidheiny regional science and urban economics 36 270 299 279definition 3 .the elasticity of equilibrium housing prices w.r.t. to aggregate disposable income in a community j with given population is dpj d1 c0tj c0 c1 eyi c2 c31 c0tj c0 c1 eyi pj c12 c12 c12 c12 hd j hsj dpj d1 c0tj c0 c11 c0tj pjjhd j hsj  definition 3 defines the reaction of equilibrium housing prices to changes in disposable income of the population and hence in the tax rate. note that the reaction of the housing pricedepends not only on the housing supply function but also on the characteristics, i.e. tastes andincomes, of the local population.
2.4. public sector community jsets the amount of a local public good. it is public in the sense that it is publicly provided and that all residents consume the same amount of the good. the cost of providing thisgood is an increasing function of the amount provided g jand the number of inhabitants njin the community. for simplicity, i assume  cg j nj c0 c1  c0 c1gjnj  where c0z0 and c1n0. note that there are no spillovers in the production of the good across communities. the increasing cost in the number of beneficiaries means that the good is not apure public good since there is rivalry in consumption. one can think of e.g. schools, streetconstruction and maintenance, city planning activities, etc. a positive constant c 0implies increasing returns to scale in the production of the public good.
the community finances the publicly provided good by a proportional income tax. the tax revenue is tj z1 0zyp ja  ypja tjyf y a dyda njtjeyj  where eyjis the mean income in community j. in equilibrium, the community s budget is balanced  cg j nj c0 c1  tj 3  the tax rate and the amount of public goods are determined in a majority rule vote by the residents of the community. at this stage, households take the population of the community asgiven. epple and romer call voters with this behavior myopic , as they ignore the migration consequences from the political outcome in their community.
8 8voter myopia is assumed in westhoff ,rose ackerman ,epple and romer andfernandez and rogerson .fernandez and rogerson rationalize dmyopicness tby modelling the households decisions as a two stage process in which households first choose their place of residence and then choose their consumption bundle and political behavior in the chosen community. assuming perfect foresight, the political outcome in the second stage is anticipated when choosing the location. in epple and platt voters take the migrational effects of their voting decision into account while holding other locations political decision constant. kessler and lu lfesmann allow the households to relocate after voting. i was not able to find numerical equilibria without assuming voter myopia.k. schmidheiny regional science and urban economics 36 270 299 280definition 4 . the public choice frontier pcf jin community j is the set oftriples, where the pair satisfies budget balance and p jclears the housing market , given the housing demand with tax rate tj.
proposition 3 .consider the subpopulation of households with taste ain community j and assume that the income elasticity of the housing price is below 1 for all on the pcf j. if a household y jprefers the triple on the pcf jto all other triples on the pcf j, then any richer household opposes a reduction in taxes.
proof. the proof refers to fig. 3 . consider the indifference curves of three voters with household income yvby byw, respectively, given the same taste parameter a. these indifference curves take into account the reaction of the housing prices to a change in the income tax rates. the straightline is the pcf in community j. one can verify in the figure that the pivotal voter y prefers the pair  to all other combinations on the pcf. it is shown in appendix a that the indifference curve is monotonically increasing in tand that its derivative w.r.t. tis decreasing in yif the equilibrium income elasticity of the housing price is below 1. therefore, all richervoters, e.g. yw, dislike all apcf jcombinations with taxes lower than tj, while all poorer voters, e.g. yv, dislike higher taxes. 5 y j is called the locus of pivotal voters. it is a decreasing function in a, as the price reduction induced by higher taxes is more appreciated by households with a stronger taste forhousing. note that from the perspective of a na ve voter who ignores the housing market, proposition 3 holds without the additional assumption of a housing price elasticity below 1.
definition 5 .a triple on community j s pcf is called a majority rule voting equilibrium when no other triple on the pcf is strictly preferred bya majority of the community s residents.
as an implication of proposition 3, a majority rule voting equilibrium in community jis established when z 1 0zmin y  ja yp ja  ypja fy a dyda 1 2z1 0zyp ja  ypja fy a dyda 4  and if the equilibrium income elasticity of the housing price is below 1.
gj tjy  pcfj yy    fig. 3. v oters indifference curves in the space.k. schmidheiny regional science and urban economics 36 270 299 2812.5. equilibrium the overall equilibrium of the multi community model is a situation in which the location choice and the political equilibrium are consistent, i.e. no household has an incentive to move,local taxes and public good provision is the outcome of a majority rule vote by the localresidents and the local housing markets are in equilibrium.
definition 6 . a set of community characteristics ,j 1, ...,j, and an allocation of individual households across communities is an equilibrium if and only if  all households choose their community to maximise their utility,  the housing market clears in all communities,  there is a majority rule voting equilibrium in all communities.
note that there is always a symmetric equilibrium in which all communities show identical characteristics and the local income and taste distribution of households is areplication of the universe when c 0 0 and housing supply is homogeneous of degree one in land area. however, symmetric equilibria may not be stable.9the focus of this paper is on the empirically interesting case of asymmetric equilibria where all communities exhibit distinctcharacteristics.
existence of asymmetric equilibrium is proved by goodspeed in a model with income taxes, taste homogeneity, na ve voters and a uniform income distribution. epple et al.  show existence in a model with property taxes and homogeneous tastes. unfortunately, as in other models with taste heterogeneity , a proof of existence and uniqueness of this equilibrium cannot be established. however, eqs. , , , and providethe basis for a computational strategy to find equilibria numerically.
3. numerical equilibrium in this section the qualitative and quantitative properties of the model are investigated in a fully specified and calibrated model.
3.1. calibration i calibrate the above outlined model to the metropolitan area of zurich in switzerland. the area around the city of zurich forms the biggest swiss metropolitan area. the city of zurich hasabout 330,000 inhabitants and is the capital of the canton of zurich. the canton of zurichcounts 1.2 million inhabitants in 171 individual communities. as described in the introduction, each of these communities can set its own level of income taxes.
the analysis is restricted to a ring of the most integrated communities around the center. this ring is formed by all communities in the canton of zurich with more than 1 3 of the working 9the notion of dstability tin an intrinsically static model is rather peculiar. nevertheless, equilibria in static multicommunity models are often judged by their ddynamic tbehavior. in this ad hoc interpretation, an equilibrium is called dstable twhen the change of community characteristics induced by the migration of dfew thouseholds gives these households an incentive to move back.k. schmidheiny regional science and urban economics 36 270 299 282population commuting to the center.10the center community itself, the city of zurich, is not included in the analysis, because the model cannot be expected to predict the center peripherypattern well.
11 the whole area of the peripheral communities has a physical size of 261 km2of which 87 km2are dedicated to development. in 1997, the fringe communities were populated by around 281,882 inhabitants .12the system of 40 communities in the periphery is modelled as two distinct jurisdictions with equal land area.
the two groups of communities consist of the 17 communities with the highest income tax ratesand the 23 communities with the lowest tax rates, respectively. the community characteristics ofthis area are discussed in the introduction . the calibrated parameters are summarized at the bottom of table 1 .
3.1.1. income distribution the income distribution is calibrated with data from the swiss federal tax administration.
we use a log normal distribution to approximate this right skewed distribution. the estimation of the mean e 11.05 and standard deviation sd 0.53 from the observed income bins is described in appendix b. for numerical tractability, the model distribution is truncated at aminimum income of y min 23,000 and a maximum income ymax 500,000.13 3.1.2. taste distribution the taste distribution is calibrated with data from the swiss labor force survey.14the 1995 cross section contains monthly housing expenditure of renters for 1124 households in the above defined region.15using the housing demand function in section 2.1 , the taste parameter aof a household with disposable income ydcan be calculated as , where ph is expenditure on housing and phminis the housing expenditure of the household with minimal disposable income yd,min. the disposable income of a household ydis calculated as reported household income minus federal, state and communal taxes. the average yearly housingexpenditure of households around subsistence level is taken to approximate ph min. this enables to approximate each household s taste parameter a. a beta distribution with mean e 0.17 11i thank an anonymous referee for pointing to this fact and urging me to rethink the explanatory power of the model.
multi community models are inherently spaceless and do therefore not include any attractiveness from being central. the center community does not unexpectedly not fit the general pattern predicted by the model despite its very high taxes, the city of zurich, has relatively high housing prices. furthermore, the center community provides many serviceswhich are in fact consumed to a large extent by households living in the suburbs. the per capita expenditures of the cityof zurich are therefore higher than in any community in the periphery. note that epple and sieg also exclude the city of boston in their empirical study of the boston metropolitan area.
12source statistisches amt des kantons zu rich, gemeindedaten per 31.12.1998.
15of course, there is a selection bias by only considering renters. because the proportion of renters is very high in switzerland , this is not a first order concern.14swiss federal statistical office, schweizerische arbeitskra fterhebung 1995.13the minimum income is subsistence level for a one person household as defined by the schweizerische konferenz fu r sozialhilfe and adjusted for inflation. the maximum income is chosen arbitrarily, but has no influence on the numerical simulation due to the low weight on high incomes.10the number of commuters to the city of zurich and the size of the working population in the communities is based on the 1990 census. this somewhat arbitrary definition of the urban area is chosen to justify the model s assumption thatthe households income is exogenous, i.e. that they choose their place of residence independent of where they work. it results in a set of communities closest to the central business district. a wider area around the city of zurich would include smaller but locally important job clusters such as the city of wintherthur and the towns around the airport.k. schmidheiny regional science and urban economics 36 270 299 283and standard deviation sd 0.11 adequately describes the distribution of the so calculated taste parameter. taste and income are assumed to be uncorrelated.16 3.1.3. housing and public good production the price elasticity of housing supply is h 3 as in epple and romer andgoodspeed  . the production of the public good exhibits constant per capita costs, i.e. c0 0 and c1 1.
3.1.4. preference parameters the parameters bh 700, bb 13000 are chosen such that the consumption bundle of the minimal income household in equilibrium corresponds to the empirical findings. the benefittable 1 equilibrium values of the simulation and data model simulation data 1997 homogeneous preferencesheterogeneous preferenceszurich metropolitan area  harmonized high tax low tax high tax low tax wholeahigh taxalow taxa  1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8  community characteristics t income tax rate 0.055 0.081 0.046 0.068 0.049 0.058b0.065b0.052b p rent 11.29 9.89 12.29 10.62 11.87 223c210c237c p rent, relative 1 1 1.24 1 1.12 1 1 1.13 g public good prov. 4064 3531 4587 3624 4321 4023d3810d4241d size l area 1 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5 1 0.497e0.503e n inhabitants 1 0.461 0.539 0.389 0.611 1 0.494f0.506f income distribution ey mean income 73,992 43,730 99,842 52,964 87,401 73,992g63,864g80,562g median income 64,156 44,205 88,239 43,332 76,900 64,156g56,163g68,803g welfare consequences  average cv 18.0 234.2 56.6 34.8 n 52 93 61 66  the calibrated model parameters bh 700, bb 13000, bg 3100, c 0.02, e 0.17, sd 0.11 , sd 0 , e 11.05, sd 0.53, ymin 23,000, ymax 500,000, h 3,c0 0 and c1 1.
a23 communities with lowest taxes vs. 17 communities with highest taxes, excluding city of zurich.
blocal income tax rate, married couple with taxable income of chf 70,000, taxpayer weighted average.
cchf per square meter, population weighted mean.
dexpendit. for education, security, traffic, culture, health, planning and admin., chf per taxpayer.
earea dedicated for housing.
flocal resident population.
gsee appendix b, truncated as in simulation.
16allowing for correlation between taste and income would introduce an systematic relationship between income and housing demand. this systematic relationship is, however, already modelled by the non homotheticpreferences that lead to decreasing relative housing expenditures with increasing incomes. the random component of preferences is therefore assumed to be orthogonal to income. this assumption is also used by epple and platt .k. schmidheiny regional science and urban economics 36 270 299 284from additional units of the public good is taken from goodspeed asc 0.02. the existential needs for the public good bg 3100 is set to produce equilibrium public expenditures close to the observed ones. average local expenditures for education, security, traffic, culture,health, planning and administration were 4023 chf per taxpayer in 1997.
17 additional data is used to assess the accuracy of the calibrated model . in the year 1997, the communal tax rate for a married couple with taxable income of chf 70,000 ranged from 4.7 to 5.7 in the low tax communities and from 5.8 to 7.2 in the high tax communities.18the rental price for housing was on average chf 210 per m2in the high tax communities and 237 in the low tax communities.19the median income in the high tax communities is chf 63,900 opposed to chf 80,600 in the low taxcommunities. this large differences in the tax base allow the low tax communities to have about10 higher public expenditures than the high tax communities . fig. 1 visualizes the spatial distribution of tax rates, incomes, housing prices and public goods provision.
3.2. simulated equilibrium the equilibrium values p j,gjandtj,i 1, 2, must satisfy eqs. and and guarantee that the households reside in the community they prefer as expressed in eq. . unfortunately, there is no closed form solution to this nonlinear system of 6 equations, i.e. eqs. , , and  in both communities, and six unknowns. the equation system is therefore numerically solved forthe equilibrium values of the model.
20 table 1 shows the equilibrium values for the calibrated model in columns 4 and 5. as can be seen, the equilibrium values of the two communities differ substantially. the tax rate t1in the high tax community is 39 higher than in the low tax community, whereas the housing price is12 and the public provision 19 lower. the average household income in the high taxcommunity is chf 52,964 a year compared to chf 87,401 in the low tax community. thus, thesimulated model explains very well not only the observed sign but also the magnitude of thedifferences in tax rates, housing prices and public goods provision. the model also explains, butslightly overestimates, the observed difference in incomes. the equilibrium values for the case of taste homogeneity are given for comparison in columns 2 and 3. with taste homogeneity, the model predicts perfect income segregation and hence much higher than observed differences intax rates, land rents and public goods provisions.
the segregation of the population in the two communities is shown in fig. 4 . the left picture shows the locus of indifferent households, y  12which turns out to be an increasing function of income in the present equilibrium. this implies that, given a subpopulation with equal tastes, 19source wu est und partner, zurich. offer prices for apartments in newspapers and online in 1997.
20numerically solving the equation system is tedious and time consuming. the aggregation of individual demand and voting behavior requires double integrals over the community population. these integrals cannot be calculatedanalytically. gauss legendre quadrature with 40 nodes in each dimension is used to approximate the various double integrals. numerically minimizing the sum of squared deviations from the equilibrium conditions with the gauss  newton method solves for the equilibrium values. appropriate scaling of the arguments and of the equilibrium conditionsis important for the accuracy of the result. convergence is only achieved with good starting values. starting values are obtained from a grid search over the six dimensional space of possible values.18source statistisches amt des kantons zu rich, steuerfu sse 1997 and tax scheme according to steuergesetz vom 8.
juni 1997, tarif a.17source statistisches amt des kantons zu rich.k. schmidheiny regional science and urban economics 36 270 299 285richer households prefer the low tax high price community.21however, this does not lead to perfect income segregation between the two communities since the households have differentpreferences. although the average income in the high tax community is much lower than in the low tax community, households from almost all income groups can be found in both communities. the right picture in fig. 4 presents the resulting income distributions in the two communities. fig. 4 left also shows the loci of pivotal voters which split the communities  populations into half. note that the distribution in the high tax community as well as the one inthe low tax community are skewed to the right and the mean is considerably above the median.this replicates the observed pattern in the zurich area. households in rich low tax communitiesvote for more public goods than households in poor high tax communities, yet this generouspublic good provision can be financed by a lower tax rate, due to the higher average income of the residents.
the prediction that rich households locate in low tax communities is also established by kessler and lu lfesmann . however, in their model the attractiveness of low taxes is offset by low public good provision in the rich community. in my more general model, it isthe high housing prices that deter the poor from moving to rich communities that offer bothattractive taxes and public good provision. the high public good provision in the richcommunity corresponds with the empirical study by epple and sieg and the theoretical work by epple et al. as well as with the specified version of nechyba s model.
22all of these models predict higher after property tax housing prices in the rich community, but they do note make a statement about the relationof taxes. note that epple and romer and epple and platt predict  somewhat against their own evidence the exact opposite relation of public good provision and housing prices across communities. hansen and kessler predict lower taxes, lower public good provision  households prefer  high tax low price community households prefer low taxborder households  pivotal voters  10.5 11 11.5 12 12.5 13 log incomepdf high tax community  low tax  community  whole   population  fig. 4. income and taste segregation in equilibrium. the left figure shows the preferred community for all household types. the right figure shows the resulting income distributions in both communities.
21note that the households with a very high taste for housing prefer to live in the low price community. this, however, applies to only 5 of the population, as the weight on taste parameters above 0.33 is low.
22the general model of nechyba provides a powerful existence proof under very weak conditions for the case of property taxation but yields only limited statements on the possibly emerging segregation of the population.k. schmidheiny regional science and urban economics 36 270 299 286transfer and higher housing prices in the rich community. hence none of these models is able to explain the pattern of community characteristics as observed in swiss metropolitanareas.
3.3. welfare consequences of decentralization the above segregated equilibrium is now compared to the equilibrium when jurisdictions harmonize their income tax levels and households locate randomly.
23the equilibrium values with tax harmonization are presented in column 1 in table 1 . one can immediately see that the housing price, tax level and public good provision lie between the corresponding values in thetwo community model. the decentralization of tax authority to two communities does thus notlead to an overall reduction of taxes, but to relatively lower taxes in the rich community andhigher taxes in the poor community.
the welfare effects from decentralized taxation and the associated segregated equilibrium depend on both the households incomes and tastes. they are revealed by inspecting the compensating variation , defined as the additional gross income that compensates a household for a shift from the equilibrium with harmonized taxes to the segregated equilibrium 24 vt h ph gh y a vt j pj gj y cv a c0 c1   the implied compensating variation cvdepends on both the household s income yand taste a as well as the community jit chooses in the decentralized case  cvjy a y1 c0th c0 bb c0phbh c138ph pj c18 c19 c0agh c0bg gj c0bg c  c0y1 c0tj c0 c1  c0bb c0pjbh c2 c3 1 c0tj  table 1 reports the average cvfor each community. households in the poor community have to be compensated by an average income allowance of chf 57 compared to chf 35 in the richcommunity. note that this amount is only about one tenth of a percent of the average gross income.
the reported average of the compensating variation hides the heterogeneity of welfare consequences across different household types. the left picture in fig. 5 shows contour lines of thecvfor all household types. households in the shaded band between the two zero contour lines exhibit positive values of the cvand thus prefer tax harmonization. households further away from the border household prefer competing jurisdictions. the right picture in fig. 5 shows thecvacross incomes for a household with housing taste a ea 0.17. note that given these housing tastes, households with income below chf 44,000 10.7 , live in the poor community 1. the relatively poorer in the poor community, logb10.4, prefer decentralization, the poorest by a cvof more than chf c0150. the relatively richer in the poor community, 10.4nlogb10.6, prefer tax harmonization. the border household, which is indifferent between the two communities, needs a compensation of about chf 250 to preferdecentralization. the households in the rich community have opposed preferences towards fiscal decentralization the relatively richer, logn12.1, prefer decentralization whereas the relatively poorer, 10.6 nlogb12.1, would prefer harmonized taxes. summing up, the 23tax harmonization is equivalent to the equilibrium that would emerge if the two distinct jurisdictions merged. it is also equivalent to the symmetric equilibrium in the decentralized situation.
24the compensating variation defined above ignores the welfare implications for the landlord.k. schmidheiny regional science and urban economics 36 270 299 287households with a clear preference for one of the two communities will also benefit the most from the decentralized arrangement. the number of households that prefer tax harmonization isalso given for each community in table 1 61 of the population in the poor community and 67 of the population in the rich community prefer tax harmonization.
25 note that the above outlined welfare consequences are very sensitive to the assumed model parameters. the following three sections discuss the sensitivity of the simulation results tochanges in the main parameter.
3.4. the role of preference heterogeneity how does the heterogeneity of tastes affect the properties of the equilibrium i will answer this question by studying the calibrated model assuming different levels of taste variance while leaving the average level of tastes constant.
i start with the extreme case of homogeneous tastes. columns 2 and 3 in table 1 give the equilibrium values for this case. the population is now perfectly segregated by incomes.consequently, the income difference between the two communities is much larger than withheterogeneous tastes. also, the differences in prices, taxes and public good provision across thecommunities are much stronger. separating the single peaked right skewed distribution into twoclosed intervals leaves a right skewed distribution in the rich community and a left skewed distribution in the poor community. the welfare effects under the assumption of taste homogeneity are substantiallybigger than under heterogeneity. note that taste heterogeneity has no impact on the equilibriumvalues with tax harmonization, i.e. column 1 shows the equilibrium values for all degrees of tasteheterogeneity.
2610.5 11 11.5 12 12.5 1300.20.40.60.81 log incomehousing taste  00500 500 500  500  500 2000 5000  2000c1  c2  10.5 11 11.5 12 12.5 13 400 300 200 1000100200300 cv1cv2 border household households prefer harmonization households prefer decentralizationcv  log income fig. 5. welfare costs of decentralization. the left figure shows contour lines of the compensating variation for all household types. the right figure shows the compensating variation for households with housing tastea ea 0.17.
25it is the middle class that prefers tax harmonization and a coalition of the very rich and the very poor that prefer tax decentralization. this result reminds of epple and romano s bends against the middle q, where a coalition of rich and poor households vote in favor of privatization of schooling against the middle class which is in favor of public provision of schooling. a detailed politico economic analysis of the choice for fiscal decentralization is, however, beyondthe scope of this paper.
26the unified equilibrium in the case of taste homogeneity is theoretically different from the one in the case of taste heterogeneity as the pivotal voter varies with the taste parameter. however, this difference is numerically negligible.k. schmidheiny regional science and urban economics 36 270 299 288fig. 6 shows a series of equilibrium values for different degrees of taste heterogeneity measured by the standard deviation sd, leaving the mean of tastes constant. the horizontal axes cover a range from sd 0 to a maximum sd 0.14327including the calibrated case sd 0.11. the picture reveals that the equilibrium approaches the values of the situation with harmonized taxes, indicated by the dotted lines. this is explained by the fact that withincreasing taste variance, the population is more and more segregated by taste rather than income. this result suggests that taste heterogeneity is able to lower the negative distributional effects of a decentralized tax regime. fig. 6 shows the corresponding change of the average compensating variation. while the average cvin the poor community is almost unaffected by the amount of taste heterogeneity in the population, it falls sharply in the richcommunity. the fraction of households in the rich community which would prefer harmonizedtaxes falls accordingly from 100 0 to 63 0.143 . partial taste segregation also generates right skewed distributions in both communities.
3.5. the role of relative land area how does the relative land area in the two jurisdictions affect the properties of the equilibrium up to now, the two communities were assumed to be of equal physical land area.however, one could also partition the 40 communities into a large and small group.
fig. 7 shows a series of equilibrium values for different relative size of the two jurisdictions.
the horizontal axes specifies the land area l 1of the high tax community, indexed by 1, as fraction of total land area. the housing price and the public good provision in both communities increase with the physical size of the poor community. the poor community shows higher taxes, lower public good provision and lower housing prices than the rich community throughout allpossible partitions of land between the two communities. the order of community characteristicsis hence not affected by the relative land area. not surprisingly, the equilibrium values of acommunity that virtually covers the whole area equal the values of the equilibrium with tax harmonization, marked by the dotted lines. the equilibrium values inthe remaining very small community differ maximally from the values with harmonized taxes.the tax rate in the rich community, indexed by 2, declines with increasing relative land area in community 1. this shows that the rich community has more power to set low taxes when it is physically small. this echoes the findings by hansen and kessler , who show that segregated equilibria exist only when the rich community is small. however, my resultsdemonstrate that their finding is very model specific and segregation can also emerge insituations with equally sized local jurisdictions.
the influence of the relative land area on welfare is particularly interesting. recall that in the calibrated situation , the average household prefers harmonized taxes average compensating variation is chf 57 in the high tax and chf 35 in the low tax community.
this result does strongly depend on the relative community size as can be seen in fig. 7 . the average compensating variation in the poor high tax community, cv1, is negative if this community is small , meaning that the population does on average prefer  local taxes to harmonized taxes, as they are associated with lower housing prices. notethat it is the poorer part of the population in the poor community that profits most from the localdifferences. the rich low tax community shows a similar picture. its increased ability to set low 27given the mean ea 0.17, sd 0.143, is the maximal standard deviation that preserves the bell shaped form of the beta distribution. higher values lead to a u shaped distribution.k. schmidheiny regional science and urban economics 36 270 299 289taxes when it is small leads to a negative average compensating variation, i.e. an average preference for decentralized taxation.28note that it is the richer part of the population that profits most from the decentralized tax setting.
3.6. the role of preferences towards the public good how do the assumed preferences for the local public good affect the properties of the equilibrium this section explores the effect of the elasticity of substitution between the public andthe private good.
29the elasticity of substitution measures how easily a household can substitute the public good with the composite private goods. unfortunately, there is no single parameterthat sets the elasticity of substitution given stone geary utility. the elasticity of substitution r g b c0blng b c0 c1 blnmg b c0 c1 b c0bb b1 c0a g c0bg gc 1 1 c0a 1 c is described by the parameters bgandcand depends on household income and the taste a for housing . in the calibrated0 0.05 0.1910111213price of housing p1p2 0 0.05 0.1350040004500public good g1g2 0 0.05 0.10.040.060.08tax rate t1 t2 0 0.05 0.100.51 sdinhabitants n1n2 0 0.05 0.1406080100 sdaver. median income ey1ey2 med1med2 0 0.05 0.1050100150200250 sdaverage cv cv1cv2 fig. 6. equilibrium values for different variance of tastes. the dashed lines indicate the values with tax harmonization.
the circles indicate the calibrated equilibrium.
28this result indicates speculating beyond the limits of the model that the rich would choose to locate in a small community. anecdotic evidence from switzerland and europe suggests that tax havens are indeed usually small.
29this exercise could as well be based on the elasticity of substitution between the public good and housing . see the formulas in appendix a.k. schmidheiny regional science and urban economics 36 270 299 290equilibrium, i set cto 0.02 and bg 3100 to a value that produces average tax rates as observed.
in this section i vary rg,bwhile holding the marginal rate of substitution between the public and the private good mg b dg db c0bu bb bu bg c01 c0a g c0bg c0 c1 b c0bb c for any household type constant. this is guaranteed by holding cconstant. a constant marginal rate of substitution has several favorable properties. firstly, this procedure changes the curvature of indifference curves while leaving them tangential at any given valueofgandb, hence separating the effect from curvature from the overall esteem for the public good. secondly, it leaves the values of the benchmark equilibrium of unified communitiesunchanged because the marginal rate of substitution between the local public good and localtax rates, m g,t, and therefore the pivotal voter s perceived trade off between public good provision and taxes d g dt dv 0,hd hs remains also constant.
fig. 8 shows a series of equilibrium values for cranging from 0 to 0.18 and bgaccordingly from 4064 to c04610. the implied elasticity of substitution between the public and the private good for a household with average income and taste is graphed on the horizontal axes andranges from 0 to 1.94. the extreme case on the left with c 0,b g 4064, rb,g 0 means that the public good and the private good are perfect complements. in this situation, the equilibriumpublic good provision is exogenously given as g b g 4064. despite the identical public good provision, there is income sorting across the two communities resulting in the typicallyobserved pattern of community characteristics the rich community 2 exhibits lower taxes and0 0.5 1810121416price of housing p1p2 0 0.5 13000400050006000public good g1g2 0 0.5 10.020.040.060.080.10.12tax rate t1 t2 0 0.5 100.51 l1inhabitants n1n2 0 0.5 150100150 l1average income ey1ey2 med1med2 0 0.5 1 400 2000200 l1average cv cv1 cv2 fig. 7. equilibria for different relative area of the communities. the dashed lines indicate the values with tax harmonization. the circles indicate the calibrated equilibrium.k. schmidheiny regional science and urban economics 36 270 299 291higher housing prices than the poor community 1. the lower taxes in the rich community are a direct consequence of the larger tax base per capita. the high housing prices in the richcommunity scare the poor more than the rich and keep them from locating the low taxcommunity.
increasing the elasticity of substitution between gandbfundamentally changes the properties of the equilibrium. the population n 2in the rich community shrinks and becomes richer  with increasing rg,b. the public good provision gincreases monotonically in the rich community and decreases monotonically in the poor community. note that median householdincome is smaller than average income over the whole range of r g,bin both communities. the pivotal voters therefore successfully use the public good provision as an instrument forredistribution. the pivotal voters in the rich community target a higher level of public good thanthe voters in the poor community because the marginal tax rate to finance an additional unit of public goods decreases with average income. the tax rates in the two communities show the most dramatic changes the tax rate in the poor community is initially larger, increases slightlybefore it falls monotonically to zero. the tax rate in the rich community is initially smaller, fallsslightly and then increases steadily. housing prices in the rich community are higher than in thepoor community over the whole range of r g,b. interestingly, for a higher degree of substitutability of the public good the rich choose the community that offers more public goodprovision even though that community yields high taxes and high housing prices. this is a consequence of the assumed linear expenditure system that implies that the marginal rate of substitution between the public and the private good increases with income, i.e. the public good becomes a more and more scarce good. note that there is an equilibrium in which the tax rates in0 11010.51111.512price of housing p1p2 0 102000400060008000public good g1g2 0 100.020.040.060.08tax rate t1 t2 0 100.51inhabitants n1n2 0 1406080100aver. median income ey1ey2 med1med2 0 1 1000 5000  g,b g,b g,baverage cv cv2cv1 fig. 8. equilibrium value for different levels of substitutability between public and private good. the dashed lines indicate the values with tax harmonization. the circles indicate the calibrated equilibrium.k. schmidheiny regional science and urban economics 36 270 299 292the two communities equal. in this situation, the income sorting of the population is fully driven by the trade off between local public good provision and local housing prices.
the numerical results in the exercise in this section are very model and parameter specific.
however, there are two general lessons. firstly, different form the literature on propertytaxation, there is no natural order of community characteristics in multi community models withincome taxation. rich communities may be attractive to rich people because of either low taxes or a high level of public good provision. secondly, the non existence proposition of hansen and kessler is very specific to their model and does not apply in general income tax models.
4. conclusions this paper presents a model of an urban area with local income taxes used to finance a local public good. the main assumptions of the model are as follows households differ in incomes and tastes for housing. the demand for housing and non housing consumption is a linear expenditure system. the share of housing in the budget of the households is onaverage declining with income. non housing consumption is only a partial substitute for thepublicly provided good.
the existence of a segregated equilibrium is shown in a calibrated two community model assuming realistic single peaked distributions for income and taste in housing. the low taxcommunity exhibits both higher housing prices and higher public good provision than the high tax community. the equilibrium features segregation of households by both incomes and tastes.
the emerging segregation pattern is such that most rich households prefer the low tax high price community. as tastes differ across households, this does not lead to a perfect income segregationbut to an income distribution in the rich low tax community that stochastically dominates theincome distribution in the poor high tax community. while households from all income groupscan be found in both communities, average income in the high tax community is much lowerthan in the low tax community. the model is able to explain the substantial differences in localincome tax levels, average incomes, local housing prices and the local provision of public goodsacross communities in swiss urban areas.
the numerical investigation shows that the order of community characteristics depends on the preferences for the local public good. the above ordering of community characteristics holds forlow degrees of substitutability between public and private goods. when the public good is easilysubstituted by private goods the rich community exhibits higher housing prices and higherpublic goods provision as well as higher taxes.
the numerical investigation also suggests that taste heterogeneity reduces the distributional effects of local tax differences. the differences of characteristics across communities aremaximal when tastes are equal for all households and when the population is accordingly perfectly segregated by income. these differences decrease with increasing taste heterogeneity as the income segregation of the population becomes more and more diffuse.
the numerical investigation furthermore suggests that the relative size of the individual jurisdictions has great impact on the equilibrium outcome. the characteristics of a relativelylarge community are close to the equilibrium characteristics of a single jurisdiction that coversthe whole area. conversely, the relatively small community differs substantially from thesingle jurisdiction. for example, rich communities are able to set lower taxes when they aresmall. however, contrary to the findings by hansen and kessler , a tax haven need not be small.k. schmidheiny regional science and urban economics 36 270 299 293multi community models are especially well suited to study metropolitan areas as they assume that the residence choice of a household is made after and independent of the decision ofwhere its members work. nevertheless the results presented in this paper may also shed light onfiscal decentralization at the level of states or countries.
acknowledgement i would like to thank veronika aegerter, frank bodmer, stephen calabrese, dennis epple, timothy goodspeed, yannis ioannides, anke kessler, klaus neusser, and the participants of thebrown bag seminars in bern, the 2003 annual meetings of the swiss society of economics andstatistics in bern and the verein fu r socialpolitik in zu rich. i am grateful to wu est und partner, and especially to ju rg mosimann for the provision of the housing price data. heather murray helped me find the right words. finally, i wish to thank the editor, konrad stahl, and twoanonymous referees for improving the quality of this paper.
appendix a the household problem is max h buh b g a alnh c0bh 1 c0a lnb c0bb clng c0bg c0 c1 s t ph bvy1 c0t  this leads to the housing demand h4 ht p y a ay1 c0t c0 pbh c0bb c138 p bh  the income elasticity of housing e bh4 by1 c0t y1 c0t  h4 ay1 c0t  ay1 c0t c0 pbh c0bb c138 pbh and the indirect utility function v alna 1 c0a ln 1 c0a c0 alnp lny1 c0t c0 pbh c0bb c138 clng c0bg c0 c1   the marginal rates of substitution in property 1 are derived by totally differentiating the indirect utility function  mg t dg dt c0bv bt bv bg yg c0bg c0 c1 cy1 c0t c0 pbh c0bb c138  mg p dg dp c0bv bp bv bg h4g c0bg c0 c1 cy1 c0t c0 pbh c0bb c138  mt p dt dp c0bv bp bv bt c0h4 y k. schmidheiny regional science and urban economics 36 270 299 294differentiation of the mrs w.r.t. income and taste yields property 2  bmg t by c0g c0bg c0 c1 pbh bb  cy1 c0t c0 pbh c0bb c1382 bmg t ba 0  bmg p by c01 c0t g c0bg c0 c1 bh cy1 c0t c0 pbh c0bb c1382 bmg p ba g c0bg pc  bmt p by 1 c0a pbh c0abb py2 bmt p ba c0y1 c0t c0 pbh c0bb py  the independence of the mrs ratio in property 3 follows directly  bmg t by c30bmg p by pbh bb 1 c0t bh  bmt g by c30bmt p by cppbh bb  1 c0a pbh c0abb c138 g c0bg c0 c1  where mt,g 1 mg,t.
the locus of indifferent households between community jandi  yyjia pjbh bb c0 c1 pa igj c0bg c0 c1c c0bb pibh pa jgi c0bg c0 c1c 1 c0tj c0 c1 pa igj c0bg c0 c1c c01 c0ti pa jgj c0bg c0 c1c  solves v v for y. alternatively, the locus solves for a   yyjiy lny1 c0tj c0 c1  c0pjbh c0bb y1 c0ti c0 pibh c0bb c20 c21  clngj c0bg gi c0bg  lnpj pi c0 c1  the locus a ji is either strictly increasing and concave in yor strictly decreasing and convex, as can easily be verified by inspecting the first and second derivative b aaji by c01 c0tj c0 c1 pibh c0bb c138 c0 1 c0ti pjbh c0bb c2 c3 y1 c0tj c0 c1  c0pjbh c0bb c2 c3 y1 c0ti c0 pibh c0bb c138 lnpj pi c0 c1 b2 aaji by2 c0b aaji byd1 c0tj c0 c1 y1 c0ti c0 pibh c0bb c138 1 c0ti y1 c0tj c0 c1  c0pjbh c0bb c2 c3 y1 c0tj c0 c1  c0pjbh c0bb c2 c3 y1 c0ti c0 pibh c0bb c138 and provided that all household reach the subsistence level, i.e. ynpbh bbn0, in both communities.
the utility difference between community jandiis vjy a c0 viy a alnpj pi c18 c19  lny1 c0tj c0 c1  c0pjbh c0bb y1 c0ti c0 pibh c0bb c20 c21  clngj c0bb gi c0bb c18 c19  k. schmidheiny regional science and urban economics 36 270 299 295differentiation of the above expression w.r.t. yandais used in the proof of propositions 1 and 2  bvj c0vi c0 c1 by 1 y c0pjbhbb 1 c0tj c01 y c0pibhbb 1 c0ti bvj c0vi c0 c1 ba lnpi c0 lnpj c0 c1   the rate of substitution between tax rate and public good provision a voter faces is derived from totally differentiating the indirect utility function considering the housing market reaction,dp dt  hd hs  dg dt c12 c12 c12 c12 dv 0 hd hs c0bv bt c0bv bpddp dt c12 c12 c12 c12 hd hs bv bg mg t mg pddp dt c12 c12 c12 c12 hd hs  g c0bg cy1 c0t c0 pbh c0bb c138y h4dp dt c12 c12 c12 c12 hd hs c20 c21   the voter s rate of substitution is positive when the price effect on the housing market is not too large  dg dt c12 c12 c12 c12 dv 0 hd hsn0 iffdp p d1 c0t 1 c0t c12 c12 c12 c12 hd hsby1 c0t  ph4for all a  the voter s rate of substitution decreases with income bdg dtjdv 0 hd hs by bmg t by bmg p bydp dtjhd hsd  c0g c0bg cy1 c0t c0 pbh c0bb c1382pbh bb 1 c0t bhdp dt c12 c12 c12 hd hs c20 c21 if the price effect on the housing market is not too large  bdg dtjdv 0 hd hs byb0 iffdp p d1 c0t 1 c0t c12 c12 c12 c12 hd hsbpbh bb pbh  both the condition on the sign of the voter s marginal rate of substitution and the sign of its derivative w.r.t. yare fulfilled ifdp p d1 c0t 1 c0t jhd hsb1 and all households reach the subsistence level.
the compensating variation cvjis the additional gross income that a household in e.g.
community jneeds in order to be compensated for a shift from the symmetric equilibrium, , to the asymmetric equilibrium, . solving vt h ph gh y a vt j pj gj y cv a c0 c1k. schmidheiny regional science and urban economics 36 270 299 296forcvyields the compensating variation for a household with income yand taste ain community j  cvjy a y1 c0th c0 bb c0phbh c138ph pj c18 c19 c0agh c0bg gj c0bg c  c0y1 c0tj c0 c1  c0bb c0pjbh c2 c3 1 c0tj  the average compensating variation in community jis then computed as ecvj 1 njz1 0zyp ja  ypja cvjy a fy a dyda  the marginal rates of substitution between the public and the private goods used in section 3.6 are derived by totally differentiating the utility function  mg b dg db c0bu bb bu bg c01 c0a g c0bg c0 c1 b c0bb c  mg h dg db c0bu bh bu bg c0ag c0bg c0 c1 h c0bh c  the elasticity of substitution between the public and the private goods is  rg b c0blng b c16 c17 blnbu bg bu bb c18 c19 c01 bdbu bb 1 gdbu bg b2u bb2 bu bb 2 c02b2u bbbg bu bbdbu bg b2u bg2 bu bg 2 b c0bb b1 c0a g c0bg gc 1 1 c0a 1 c  rg h c0blng h c16 c17 blnbu bg bu bh c18 c19 c01 hbu bh 1 gbu bg b2u bh2 bu bh 2 c02b2u bhbg bu bbdbu bg b2u bg2 bu bg 2 h c0bh ha g c0bg gc 1 a 1 c  both elasticities of substitution are increasing in cholding cconstant  brg b bc c12 c12 c12 c12 g c0bg c b c0bb b1 c0a g c0bg gc 1 1 c0a 1 c c18 c1921 c2n0  brg h bc c12 c12 c12 c12 g c0bg c h c0bh ha g c0bg gc 1 a 1 c c18 c1921 c2n0  appendix b i estimate the local income density f from publicly available local income distribution data. the federal tax administration publishes the number of households with tax able income ink. schmidheiny regional science and urban economics 36 270 299 297seven different income classes.30i assume that incomes are log normally distributed and estimate the mean ljand the variance rj2of this distribution using maximum likelihood.31i estimate a truncated log normal distribution as the first reported income interval is empty fordata collecting reasons. the log likelihood function for any community iis logl j x6 k 1skdloguck 1 c0ui rj c18 c19  c0uck c0uj rj c18 c19 1 c0uc1 c0uj rj c18 c192 6643 775  where uiandri2are mean and variance of log income in community i.skis the number of households in income class kwith lower interval limit cka log, log, log, log, log, log, l .u is the cdfof the standard normal distribution.
references