educational justice and socio economic segregation in schools harry brighouse sociologists exploring educational injustice often focus on socio economic segregation as a central measure of injustice.the comprehensive ideal, furthermore, has the idea of socio economic integration built into it. the current paper arguesthat socio economic segregation is valuable only insofar as itserves other, more fundamental values. this matters because sometimes policy makers will nd themselves facing trade offs between increasing integration and promoting the other, morefundamental values that underpin the value of integration.
jonathan kozol s the shame of the nation contains an appendix demonstrating the unequal levels of funding in 5 metropolitan areas ofthe united states and, also, the socio economic segregation betweenschool districts in those areas. the results are stark. school districts with very high levels of child poverty have relatively low funding. districts with low levels of child poverty have highper student funding. take the chicago area per pupil spending is 17,291in highland park and deer eld that have 8 of their pupils on free andreduced school lunch. it is 14,909 in new trier, in which only 1 ofpupils are low income. in the urban chicago district, with 85 on free andreduced school lunch, spending is just 8,482 . similar gures are presented for philadelphia, milwaukee, new york city, detroit and boston . teachers salaries are considerably higher in the higher spending districts but, because metropolitanareas are considered, the schools compete with each other in the sameregional labour markets.
in the uk socioeconomic segregation between schools is also serious, although it is not compounded by, but compensated for, by fundinginequalities .
1not only political activists like kozol, but sociologists and economists of education too focus a good deal on the degree to which schools are segregated by socio economic class. think of studies of school choice inthe uk one of the central debates around choice is the extent to which itcauses segregation among schools. sharon gewirtz, stephen ball andrichard bowe, in their extensive study of the ways in which differentparents choose among schools, suggest that the introduction of choiceshould trigger further segregation, because different modes of choice arejournal of philosophy of education, vol. 41, no. 4, 2007 r2007 the author journal compilation r2007 journal of the philosophy of education society of great britain. published by blackwell publishing, 9600 garsington road, oxford ox4 2dq, uk and 350 main street, malden, ma 02148, usa.utilised by parents from different social classes . they say furthermore, the exercise of choice as a process ofmaintaining social distinctions and educational differentiations, as relatedto social class and the class composition of schools, is likely to exaggeratesocial segregation . stephengorard, chris taylor and john fitz contest the conjecture, showingthat, in fact, the introduction of the choice reforms in 1988 reduced, rather than increasing, the degree of socio economic segregation. the empirical scholars look at the mechanisms that produce segregation, the extent ofsegregation and its consequences. although they typically refrain fromovert normative commentary on segregation they frequently evince thesense that it is a prima facie bad something to be avoided if it can bewithout doing damage to other important values.
my argument in this paper is that socio economic segregation of schools is not fundamentally normatively interesting. by this i mean that it is only interesting in so far as it points us to violations of social justice in education, where social justice is understood solely in terms that areindependent of whether there is socio economic segregation. i do notmean to dampen the interest of empirical researchers in socio economicsegregation, and its causes. but i do mean to encourage them to look, inaddition, for its effects in particular contexts. finding socio economicsegregation of schools tips us off to the possibility of social injustice, but itdoes not constitute social injustice. more importantly, while socioeconomic integration of schools is usually one useful, if partial, instrument for ameliorating social injustice in education i will argue that it is notalways part of the most ef cient strategy for attacking educationalinjustice.
because different mechanisms produce socio economic segregation in different countries, and because the degree of segregation varies, there isno reason to expect a single policy or set of policies will deal withsegregation in all contexts. but we can give an account of why segregation is wrong that applies across contexts. in section i, i shall give an account of the goals and principles that constitute social justice in education . in section ii i contrast this account of justice with thecomprehensive ideal, which sees segregation as bad in itself, and suggestthat the injustice account is better. i then, in section iii, identify the centralmechanisms by which segregation can be expected to produce educationalinjustice, in particular educational inequality. in section iv i elaborate andconsider the best principled objection to integrating schools that doing so violates the liberty of students or parents. i argue that integrationists should heed that objection, but that it will not, when understood properly,stand in the way of most of the policies integrationists would advocate. insection v i argue against the view that, in the uk and the us at least,educational injustice can fully be countered without structural change thatincludes efforts to integrate schools. but i argue in the conclusion thatthere may be circumstances in which the fact of segregation can beexploited better to target resources at the least advantaged, and thus to address educational inequality at least.576 h. brighouse r2007 the author journal compilation r2007 journal of the philosophy of education society of great britaini justice in education what are the right normative grounds for evaluating education policy  i want to propose, brie y, four proper goals of education, and one distributive principle. the goals are as follows   c15education should prepare children to become autonomous, selfgoverning individuals, capable of making good judgments abouthow to live their own lives, and to negotiate for themselves thecomplexity of modern life.
 c15education should equip children with the skills and knowledge necessary for them to be effective participants in the economy, so that they can have a good range of options in the labour market, andhave access to the income necessary to ourish in a market economy  c15education should play a role in preparing children to be ourishing adults independently of their participation in the economy view much of thetraditional academic curriculum .
 c15education should prepare children to be responsible and effective participants in political life good citizens. it should do this both fortheir sakes, because a ourishing life is more secure if one is capableof making use of the rights of citizenship and for the sake of others,because a ourishing life is more secure if others are capable ofabiding by the duties of good citizenship.
2 the distributive principle is the principle of educational equality the simple version says that every child should have an equally goodeducation. but what this means is obviously contested. when youcompare children with similar talents, and similar levels of willingness toexert effort, it is pretty intuitive to say that educational equality is satis edwhen they receive a similar level of educational resources. but consider hattie, who is blind, and sid, who is equally talented and hardworking, but sighted. in their case it seems intuitive that equality requires that moreresources should be devoted to hattie in particular, resources devoted tocorrecting fully for her disability. consider an even more dif cult case kenneth, who is highly talented, and hugh, who has a serious cognitivedisability. again, it seems that hugh should be granted more resources,but this time it is hard to see that they could correct for the disability,unless we were willing to disable kenneth.
i shall not resolve these dif culties here.
3the principle of educational equality has two straightforward implications. first, children with similarlevels of ability and willingness to exert effort should face similareducational prospects, regardless of their social background, race,ethnicity, or sex. second, that children with lower levels of ability shouldreceive at least as many educational resources as those who are more able.
since most of the ensuing discussion focuses on the principle of educational equality rather than the goals of education, i want to emphasise the importance of equality rather than improving the prospectseducational justice and socio economic segregation in schools 577 r2007 the author journal compilation r2007 journal of the philosophy of education society of great britainof the least advantaged. the egalitarian theory within which my own view of educational justice is nested in fact emphasises not equality, per se, butbene ting the least advantaged , and gives that principle priority over equality so that when we have a choice between an equal distribution ofa smaller pie and an unequal distribution of a larger pie in which all getmore than under the equal distribution of the smaller pie, we chooseinequality. if a tax proposal, for example, were to inhibit growth so that the worst off were even worse off, although more equally well off with others, that would be a bad thing for them, and for everyone else. but thisgeneral rule does not apply to all areas of life. the quality of someone seducation has a real in uence on their expected lifetime income, but itsin uence is dependent on the quality of her competitors education.getting sharon from only 2 up to 3 grade c s does not do much good forher if we simultaneously get her nearest competitor linda up from 3 to 4grade cs. the employer will still prefer linda to sharon. so merely raising the oor of achievement in education does not help the less advantaged in the pursuit of earnings in the labour market unless wesimultaneously diminish the achievement gap. the size of the gap mattersbecause of the particular connection education has to other, unequallydistributed, goods. when i refer to bene ting the least advantaged in the context of education, then, i should be understood asbeing concerned with bene ting the least advantaged relative to others .
4 ii the comprehensive ideal many educational policy debates in britain have focused only indirectly on the values and principles i outlined in the previous section. the centraldebates have been about something else the practice and ideal of comprehensive schooling. whereas the above values and principles are only indirectly concerned with socio economic segregation, the compre hensive ideal seems to incorporate directly the idea that socio economicsegregation is condemnable and that integration should be pursued. thecomprehensive ideal, as it is normally understood, demands that childrenattend common schools, in part so that they can forge a common culture.richard pring quotes rst tawney  . . . inspite of their varying character and capacities, men possess in their common humanity a quality which is worth cultivating and . . . a community is most likely to make the most of that quality if it takes it intoaccount in planning its economic organisation and social institutions if it stresses lightly differences of wealth and birth and social position, and establishes on rm foundations institutions schools which meet commonneeds, and are a source of common enlightenment and commonenjoyment .
then halsey we have still to provide a common experience of citizenship in childhood and old age, in work and play, and in health and sickness. we have still in short, to develop a common culture to replace578 h. brighouse r2007 the author journal compilation r2007 journal of the philosophy of education society of great britainthe divided culture of class and status . pring himself continues  in understanding, therefore, the arguments for the common school, one needs to address the principles of equality, including equal respect forpersons, and the preparation for living in a community which requires a common culture to overcome divisions arising from wealth and birth and social position and, one might add, religion.
britain, in comparison with the usa, had woken up relatively late to these principles at least to their signi cance to educational provision.
the united states had supported from its earliest days the common school to serve the local community, whatever the ethnic and religiousbackground of the members of that community .
tim brighouse, a life long defender of the comprehensive ideal, characterises it as follows  for some mainly in the suburbs, market towns and countryside the motive has been the social desirability of all youngsters, whatever theirbackground, in a local and settled community attending the same school.
for others especially in urban areas the ideal can be realized only if schools have the full range of ability as measured by standardizedintelligence tests taken at the age of 11 .
the comprehensive ideal calls for socio economically mixed schools because it takes it to be valuable, for various reasons, that children fromdifferent social backgrounds mix in schools.
5advocates of this principle typically do not reject the goals and principle i have outlined, and they sometimes, as in pring s case above, refer to ideals of equality injustifying the ideal. but the ideal itself is usually interpreted as consistingin the demand that children who come from different social locations and are bound for different social destinations to have a point of contact in their school years, and it is the ideal, rather than the principles that mightbe appealed to in its defence, that is the focus of public debate.
the comprehensive ideal may appeal for other reasons, which have no direct point of contact with the goals and principle i ve offered. forexample cross class contact during school might facilitate a sense ofconnection between the advantaged and disadvantaged, and thus a morecohesive social fabric, which might have no noticeable impact on the goals i ve elaborated. it might even work against some of them for example, by undermining class loyalties among the disadvantaged withoutundermining them amongst the more advantaged. it might be desirablebecause it interferes with the process of maintaining and renewing socialnetworks that impede the meritocratic allocation of candidates to jobs because those who control the jobs did not attend school exclusively withothers from advantaged backgrounds, there will be fewer opportunities forchildren who are well born but academically unsuccessful to exploit these networks.educational justice and socio economic segregation in schools 579 r2007 the author journal compilation r2007 journal of the philosophy of education society of great britaini do not want to argue against the comprehensive ideal as an ideal. but i do want to claim that it is secondary in importance to the considerations ihave elaborated in the rst section. it is hard to argue for this in a way thatwould convince someone who did not already share my view. the besti can do is review a small number of situations in which there would betrade offs between the comprehensive ideal and one or another of thegoals and principle i have elaborated, and show what regarding the comprehensive ideal as more important has what seem to me to be counterintuitive consequences.
1. suppose that full socio economic integration can be achieved only at the cost of signi cantly lower achievement for the lowest achieving20 of children .
2. suppose that full socio economic integration can be achieved only at the cost of a signi cant loss in terms of the quality of citizenship exhibited by pupils across the socio economic range .
3. suppose that full socio economic integration can be achieved only at the cost of a signi cant loss for the goal of achieving personalautonomy, again throughout the socio economic spectrum .
the reader does not have to believe that these scenarios would ever arise in practice in order to be forced to make a judgment. what we are trying to establish is just which values are more important. my own view is that ineach case the comprehensive ideal should yield, because the con ictinggoals are fundamentally important, and the comprehensive ideal is not.i can only invite the reader to agree.
for the reader to think that the judgment i am trying to force her to make matters in practice , she does have to be persuaded that these tradeoffs are, or might be, forced on us in some situations. so why might these trade offs turn out to be unavoidable sometimes consider the rst. here s a possible story achieving full socio economic integration in someparticular situation results in advantaged children ooding into schools thecultures of which have to change radically to accommodate them and,perhaps more plausibly, their parents. whereas those parents hadpreviously sent their children to elite private schools, now, denied thefreedom to do so, they set to work ensuring that the schools their childrenattend are maximally designed to bene t their children rather than others.
because they have a great deal of social capital and personal energy, they succeed, to the detriment of the least advantaged pupils. consider thesecond case. suppose that contact between more and less advantagedchildren actually decreases their willingness to respect one another across class lines either because teachers do not know how to manage the newcontact between them, or because, regardless of the teachers, thebackground culture promotes snobbery in the more advantaged andinverted snobbery in the less advantaged and contact between them actually feeds those tendencies.580 h. brighouse r2007 the author journal compilation r2007 journal of the philosophy of education society of great britainwe can, in fact, tell a true story, in which the trade offs look real.
consider the case of children or moroccan and turkish origin incontemporary amsterdam. there is some evidence that children fromthose particular countries do better, academically, when concentrated intoracially segregated schools than when in raciallymixed schools. suppose this result were robust and that there were good reasons for retaining the progressive funding formula.
again, my judgment is that in circumstances like this it would beappropriate to ditch the ambition for integration, at least as long as somethreshold of social cohesion is secure. it is better to have less mutualunderstanding but fairer chances, than better mutual understanding andless fairness.
6 iii socioeconomic segregation and educational injustice segregation can inhibit justice by undermining any of the goals and principles elaborated in section i. very crudely, i suspect that religious,ethnic and cultural segregation are most relevant to the goals of autonomyand ourishing whereas socio economic segregation, which is my focushere, pertains most naturally to economic self reliance, citizenship and the principle of equality. as i said, different mechanisms work in different contexts here are four commonly cited mechanisms.
first, resourceful and well educated parents provide resources to the schools in which their children are educated. they raise funds throughparent associations and private donations at the limit, in the us, theseresources can pay for additional teachers. so the higher the concentrationof advantaged children a school has, the more resources it has, other thingsbeing equal. if disadvantaged children are mixed with advantaged children in schools they are more likely to bene t from these additional resources.
wealthy parents are also more likely to vote, organise, and lobby for morepublic spending which is a reason that fear of elite defection into privateschooling and into separate funding bases acts as aconstraint on progressive policymakers.
second, disadvantaged children are more dif cult to teach or, more precisely, more input is needed from teachers to raise them to the samelevel of achievement as more advantaged children. so, at any xed level of per student resource allocation, a school with a high concentration of disadvantaged children will achieve at a lower level than one with a moremixed population. that is, the disadvantaged children in the more mixedschool should do better, other things being equal, because they have fewercompetitors for the limited resources. the problem here, note, is not withsocio economic segregation per se, but with segregation unmitigated byappropriate changes in resource allocation.
third, children are resources for each other. peers affect each other s aspirations and each others learning habits and they learn from oneeducational justice and socio economic segregation in schools 581 r2007 the author journal compilation r2007 journal of the philosophy of education society of great britainanother. any given child has better prospects sharing a classroom with other children who are bright, well behaved and hard working than withother children who are ill behaved, lazy and dull. this is true, evendiscounting for the effects of the other children on the teacher. so whenadvantaged children congregate they are resources for each other. theyare not available as resources for the disadvantaged. now, whether thiseffect kicks in depends on how the desegregated school is organised. in particular, a school with a good socio economic mix in which children are either formally tracked by achievement level or, as in many progressiveus high schools, informally tracked by class will not be very different in this respect from two schools into which the advantaged and disadvantaged are segregated.
the nal mechanism concerns the magnetic effect of advantage on talented teachers. it is, ironically, highly rewarding to teach the studentwhom it is easy to teach. presumably it is hard for the re ective person to award themselves a great deal of credit for the achievements of very high achievers, but it is rewarding to be in the presence of that achievement.high concentrations of advantaged students will attract talented teachers,and high concentrations of disadvantaged students will repel them . when a school is socio economically mixed it candeploy the talents of those teachers attracted by the advantaged children tothe bene t of the less advantaged children, and it can do so even if itpractices some form of tracking. this nal mechanism depends for its effectiveness on particular kinds of motivation among teachers. ifthere were a large pool of talented teachers motivated to teach the least advantaged, then segregation wouldnot be a serious problem. if the pool of talented teachers were deeplyelitist in their motivations, and would leave teaching if they were not able to teach exclusively advantaged children, thende segregation would not help with the problem. but if there is a substantial pool of talented teachers who would prefer to teach a good proportion of advantaged students, but will be willing to teach a signi cantproportion of disadvantaged children, then desegregation helps with thisproblem. if this pool can be motivated by nancial incentives, orincentives regarding other aspects of their compensation package, note,desegregation is not the only solution to the problem it should bepossible to redistribute talented teachers into high concentrationdisadvantaged schools by providing them with large nancial incentives  or perhaps by providing longer vacations, shorter working days, better professional development opportunities, or smaller class sizes.
iv liberty, family values and justice socioeconomic segregation within an d across schools might cause educational inequality, and yet be entirely per missible and morally unproblematic.
in fact, in the philosophical and popular literature on educational inequality582 h. brighouse r2007 the author journal compilation r2007 journal of the philosophy of education society of great britainthis is a standard position. the argument goes as follows. educational equality may indeed matter, and may matter for the reasons that i have givenin section i. but other values matter more, and the measures needed todesegregate schools would violate these more important values. here isnathan glazer, in a review of kozol s shame of the nation  to be sure, the case for both racial integration and equality of expenditure is powerful. but the chief obstacle to achieving these goals does not seem to be the indifference of white and the nonpoor to theeducation of white and the poor. . . . rather, other values, which are notsimply shields for racism, stand in the way the value of the neighbourhood school the value of local control of education and, above all, the value of freedom from state imposition when it affects matters sopersonal as the future of one s children .
prohibiting private schools, bussing, and enforcing neighbourhood diversity all limit parental freedom. this is the parental liberty argumentagainst implementing educational equality.
7 the parental liberty argument has more power than advocates of educational equality usually think, and less than those who press it againsteducational equality usually think. consider the liberty argument againstprohibiting elite private schools. it would, indeed, be a limitation onindividual freedom to block people from spending their money the way they wanted to, and in particular to prevent them from spending their money on their children s education. blocking that kind of gift inhibitstheir freedom and it does so in a very peculiar seeming way, because itsingles out the provision of something widely recognised to beintrinsically valuable to be blocked, but allows for the provision of morefrivolous goods .
if freedom consists in being permitted to do what one wants then the wealthy parent has her freedom restricted by being prohibited from spending money on sending her child to a private school. the interesting question is whether she has a right to remain un coerced. many measures infringe freedom, and are none the worse for that. we are barred frombribing trial judges even on behalf of our own children candidates forpolitical of ce in most countries are restricted as to how much of theirown money they can contribute to their own campaigns taxation is,famously, a restriction of freedom. simply observing that some measurerestricts someone s freedom does not show that it is wrong. to the question why shouldn t i be allowed to spend my money on trying to save my child from being convicted of a crime she committed theanswer is that in order for it to be fair the criminal justice system must beinsulated from background inequalities of wealth. in this arena, fairnesstrumps freedom. similarly, the answer to the question why shouldn t i beallowed to spend my money buying my child a superior education to thatwhich others get is that in order for it to be fair the competition forsocially licensed bene ts must be insulated. the burden of proof is on the opponent of the measure supporting equality.educational justice and socio economic segregation in schools 583 r2007 the author journal compilation r2007 journal of the philosophy of education society of great britainit may seem that i am being ungenerous to the opponent here. but i am just shifting the burden of proof. the objector must show that the measureviolates some basic liberty some freedom to which we are entitled as amatter of justice. to show that we are entitled to some freedom we need toshow that it is necessary for facilitating the ful lment of some basichuman interest. this is what the best version of the liberty argument does.
before exploring this version, notice that this kind of argument cannot object to socio economic desegregation or educational equality per se, but only to particular measures designed to enforce them . the liberty objection, even on the version of it that i have rejected, counts againstprohibiting private schools but not against equalising state school funding,even though the latter might do as much to promote educational equalityin the us as the former would do in the uk. similarly, the freedomobjection does not support allowing state schools discretion over theselection of students in a system of school choice. admissions of cials do not themselves have a freedom interest in connection with their role as a state agent. when they select one child over another they are granting oneparent what she wants and denying it to another so, whatever method ofallocation is used the successful parent gets freedom and the unsuccessfulparent has freedom denied.
how does the liberty invoking opponent of socio economic desegregation to promote educational equality meet the burden of proof i haveshifted onto her the second strategy is to posit an interest in maintaining the value of the family, and claim that mechanisms designed to equalise, or desegregate, violate that interest. how powerful this move is dependson what we want to include in the value of the family. a plausible accountwill allow parents to spend a good deal of time with their children, and toexpress partiality toward their children in a range of ways. to use adamswift s example, we surely think that reading bedtime stories to one s own children is somethingone must have a right to do, even at some cost to equality of opportunity . why if we were prevented from doing that sort of thing with our children we would be deprived of the opportunity to create andmaintain a valuable familial and loving relationship with them. similarly,it seems obvious that parents must have distinctive rights to share theirvalues and enthusiasms with their children they have the right to taketheir child to their church, and to serve them food that re ects theircultural background, as long as they are not thereby harming their children, and no one else has that right.
both parent and child get something distinctively valuable from being able to share themselves with each other, and for this the parent needs a spaceof prerogatives with respect to her child.
if measures to promote educational equality, or desegregation, violated this interest, they would be impermissible. it is easy to think of equality promoting measures that would violate this interest. it would be wrong toforce all children into day care centres for 12 hours a day, 6 days a week,50 weeks of the year doing so would simply prevent the establishment of intimate parent child relationships. similarly requiring parents to live584 h. brighouse r2007 the author journal compilation r2007 journal of the philosophy of education society of great britainapart from their school age children for 10 months of every school year would be wrong, even if it facilitated equality. whatever we do to promoteeducational equality must leave suf cient space for the creation andmaintenance of valuable familial relationship. this does indeed rule outsome strategies.
but it is possible to devise equalising and desegregating measures that are entirely consistent with leaving that space available. abolishing elite private schools, for example, leaves parents with ample opportunity to create and maintain valuable relationships with their children just aspeople who now cannot afford to send their children to elite privateschools can have valuable family relationships, so would parents whowere prevented from spending their wealth that way. measures forcingschools, or giving them incentives, to nd an intake with a socio economicmix that re ected that of the society by which they were surrounded wouldsimilarly leave plenty of space. there is no reason to believe that desegregating classrooms to harness the peer effect to the bene t of the least advantaged would undermine valuable family relationships.
before moving on i want to de ect another possible objection to using the peer effect to the bene t of the least advantaged. the effects of abilityand class mixing in the classroom are much disputed. egalitarians like tobelieve that mixing bene ts the least advantaged without harming themore advantaged much. the ercest opponents of mixing like to claimthat it harms the more advantaged without bringing any bene t to the least advantaged. obviously, if either of them were proved right mixing need not be very controversial. but let us imagine the case most awkward forthe egalitarian that a desegregated classroom bene ts the low achievers,bringing up their achievement but harms high achievers, bringing theirachievement down . if this were so itwould look as if a policy of mixing simply uses the more advantaged forthe bene t of the least advantaged, without yielding any reciprocalbene ts for them. surely, the objection goes, this is unjust  in fact, it is not. whoever the advantaged child is placed with, she will be used to their bene t. in the advantaged only classroom all the childrenare being used to the bene t of each other, while in the disadvantaged only classroom all children are being used to each other s detriment. in amixed classroom the advantaged children are being used to each othersbene t and to the bene t of the least advantaged, while the damage thedisadvantaged in ict on each other is being limited through dilution.neither arrangement has a justice advantage.
v justice without structural reform  recent government policy in the uk has assumed that it is possible toaddress educational inequality without desegregating schools or over hauling the school nancing system. some schools in disadvantagedcircumstances succeed with their students, and do so with no extra  nancial resources, and with student populations relevantly like those ofeducational justice and socio economic segregation in schools 585 r2007 the author journal compilation r2007 journal of the philosophy of education society of great britainless successful schools. so we should be able to shift the performance of others without altering funding or admissions arrangements. the policyfocus shifts to what is going on in the school and the classroom.
8 this challenge to the signi cance of socio economic segregation is strongly informed by the academic literature on school effectiveness andschool improvement. this literature repeatedly emphasises two explana tory factors in successful schools leadership and ethos that are hard to operationalise and even harder to replicate. it may also be that appearances of similar disadvantage are deceiving. two schools may beset in similarly deprived urban environments, have similar socio economiccompositions in their pupil mix with, say, high levels of free schoollunches, and similar teaching staff, but face dissimilar circumstances.why because if, as the school effectiveness and improvement literatureoften claims, ethos is a key to success, the feasibility of a learning ethos may vary by the cultural outlooks of the communities from which the otherwise similarly deprived children are drawn. we know that equally poor urban and rural children perform differently, and some suspect thatthis may be attributable partly to background culture if so, there may beunmeasured differences in the otherwise similar school populations. freeschool lunch eligibility in particular is a crude measure.
9 suppose, now, that teacher quality is crucial to a school s achievement. at any given salary level there may be a xed supply of high quality teacherswilling to work in disadvantaged schools. once a school has turned the corner it may become very successful in retaining, and then attracting, more than its fair share of those teachers. schools in disadvantagedcircumstances may be competing for a xed supply of a vitally importantinput high quality teachers. they may also be competing for a xednumber of charismatic high quality leaders, the kinds of people whoseleadership is needed to steer a school in disadvantaged circumstances.
suppose, for a moment, that schools really can be improved without desegregation. strangely enough, improvements in teaching and learning might have bad effects on educational equality. geoff whitty and peter mortimore  a large scale longitudinal study of primary schools carried out by one of us found that no school reversed the usual in school pattern of advantaged pupils performing better than the disadvantaged. however,some of the disadvantaged pupils in the most effective schools made more progress than their advantaged peers in the least effective schools and did even better in absolute terms. yet . . . it would appear that, if all primaryschools were to improve so that they performed at the level of the mosteffective, the difference between the overall achievement of the most advantaged social groups and that of the disadvantaged might increase .
for the principle of educational equality as i have elaborated it the gap is what matters. maybe improved performance among the very most disadvantaged would help them enter more stable employment, but for586 h. brighouse r2007 the author journal compilation r2007 journal of the philosophy of education society of great britainthose who would have that anyway it is their relative performance, and not their absolute performance, that matters.
vi justice without de segregation  let us suppose that some system of schooling suffers from serious socioeconomic segregation, and consequently from serious educational inequality. what should a government do if we embraced thecomprehensive ideal as i described it in section ii we would nd iturgent to desegregate. but desegregation can be politically extremelydif cult. in both the countries on which i have focused the majormechanisms for maintaining segregation are very secure. in the ukprivate schooling is widely regarded as protected by the human rights act, and the political pressure against it is minimal. discretionary selection by state schools in the choice system is on the increase, at least in the sense that the government is encouraging the establishment of moreschools that are permitted to select though this mechanism is certainlyless secure than private schooling. the current government, though, seemsto regard selection within the state system as a bulwark againststrengthening the private sector if parents who can afford to go privatebelieve their children can get good enough state schooling via selectionthey will be less likely to defect and there presence in the state sector, even a segregated state sector, is highly valued. the government may well be right about this. many us states have experienced some pressureagainst the highly unequal school funding, but movement has been slow.wealthier school districts strongly oppose the shift to more equal fundingand especially resist the local revenue and spending caps needed toenforce the measures. teachers unions, which are, themselves, highlydecentralised ,and within which relatively highly paid teachers in wealthy suburban districts have more power, strongly oppose measures that would lead to slower wage growth among their most well paid members. furthermore,the measures do nothing to challenge desegregation. one would expect theincreased use of school choice to have led to a slight desegregation in theus, but it will be very slight and will have occurred only in those fewplaces where more radical choice schemes have been adopted.neighbourhood schooling and highly segregated school districting arepolitically quite secure.
i am not proposing that desegregation efforts be abandoned in these contexts. but they are hard to achieve. in the uk context in particular,there may be more ef cient ways than integration to make modestprogress toward educational equality. suppose policymakers want toameliorate educational inequality, but have reasons to fear that theavailable integration measures will provoke middle class and wealthyparents into going private or moving to the suburbs and have no levers foraddressing residential segregation. in fact, because most direct integration measures are transparent policymakers will often have reason to worryeducational justice and socio economic segregation in schools 587 r2007 the author journal compilation r2007 journal of the philosophy of education society of great britainabout this because wealthier parents can observe the operation of the policy they are better positioned to act strategically to avoid its intendedconsequences. accepting the de facto segregation and using it to target resources to the least advantaged may be a feasible alternative, at leastunder some conditions. because targeting can often be done via non statutory adjustments to funding formulae, or by devising innovativeprograms to be implemented via particular local authorities, it can be pursued more opaquely, and when it is done opaquely it is less likely to provoke political opposition. here is the single bene t of segregation egalitarians believe that more resources should be spent on the leastadvantaged than on the more advantaged but governments can onlyef ciently give money to schools. once the resources are in the school it isboth dif cult and costly to monitor how they are used. one of thedif culties that egalitarians face in desegregated schools is ensuring thatthe schools devote extra resources to the less advantaged students and middle class parents can be pretty ef cient at absorbing resources for their children. but if a school has almost exclusively low income children onecan simply give extra resources to that school and be moderately con dentthat many of those resources will go to the less advantaged. if advantagedparents recognise the availability of the extra resources and have someformal ability to select among schools, the additional resources give theman incentive to move their children into the school thus diluting the effectof the resources, but simultaneously improving the school s socioeconomic mix presumably to the bene t of the other children. in order to capture these resources middle class parents have to send their children tothe disadvantaged schools, thus contributing their own children asresources for the disadvantaged children if they do not, then the resourcesgo directly to the disadvantaged.
earlier i described some mechanisms whereby integration might promote equality. the suggestion here replicates most but not all of thosemechanisms the idea is that additional resources can be used to give teachers incentives to teach in schools with high concentrations of disadvantaged children , and can compensate forthe absence of more advantaged children. schools with high concentrationsof disadvantaged children can have longer opening hours, saturday school,and more holiday school for those children, without triggering protestsfrom middle class parents who want to be able to take their children onforeign holidays, or send them to saturday music lessons and can do so without stigmatising them relative to middle class children who do not participate in the lengthened school life. what this suggestion cannot do isharness the human capital of more advantaged parents to the bene t of theleast advantaged children, at least not directly by having them in the sameschool. but even here there might be a small bene t, if allowing stateschools to retain high concentrations of advantaged children helps stem the ow of such children into the private sector, and thus keeps their parents inthe business of lobbying for resources to go to state schools, rather than abandoning that cause as they send their children into the private sector.588 h. brighouse r2007 the author journal compilation r2007 journal of the philosophy of education society of great britainvii concluding comment nothing i have said here is supposed to impugn the comprehensive ideal as an ideal. but socioeconomic segregat ion of schools matters for a number of reasons how much it matters depends on theinstitutional context in which it is fou nd, and researchers who are interested in how unjust segregation is in any particu lar context need to look at its effects, in that context, on educational equ ality and children s prospects for autonomy. policymakers shou ld be guided primarily be a concern of justice  and their policies should a im to undermine segregation in those circumstances where doing so is the best feasible strategy for addressing injustice but should also look to other devices for ame liorating injustic e, especially when desegregation cannot be achieved in a manner that promotes equality.
correspondence department of philosophy and department of education policy studies, university of wisconsin, madison, 600 n park st,madison wi 53706, usa.e mail mhbrigho wisc.edu notes 1. stephen twigg mp, then of the department for education and skills, said in evidence to the select committee on public administration investigation into voice and choice in publicservices, whilst there is certainly not a 300 uplift, there is a very signi cant difference between the per pupil funding of tower hamlets, in the deprived east end of london, which has the highest per pupil funding in the country, and per pupil funding in some parts of the country. it isalmost double . . . response to question 488, in the minutes available at http www.parlia ment.the stationery of ce.co.uk pa cm200405 cmselect cmpubadm 49 5012705.htm .
2. i cannot argue for these aims in so short a paper but have done so elsewhere see my on education .
3. i have addressed these complications in the moral and political aspects of education  . see also terzi, 2005.
4. the obvious inspiration for a focus on bene ting the least advantaged is rawls s difference principle . but it is not, in fact, rawls s focus. rawls makes fair equality of opportunity to be lexically prior to the difference principle, suggesting a more strictly egalitarian approach to educational opportunities than i would endorse.
5. pring is right, i think, to incorporate religious and cultural mingling as part of the comprehensive ideal, but those aspects of the ideal are orthogonal for my present purposes.
6. see jan van damme, class and school composition and its effects on achievement and wellbeing illustration of the effects and a preliminary explanation , draft on le with author.
7. in the rest of this section i draw on ideas i have developed with adam swift in a number of papers.
see especially brighouse and swift, 2006 as well as legitimate parental partiality .
8. this is a central theme of uk education secretary charles clarke s recent speech to the specialist schools trust, pupil centered learning using data to improve performance and also of schools minister david miliband s ippr pamphlet opportunity for all are we nearly there yet .
9. for compelling documentation of some of these concerns see martin thrupp .
references