can private giving promote economic segregation  ignatius j. horstmanna, kimberley scharfb, al slivinskic,  arotman school of management and institute for policy analysis, university of toronto, canada buniversity of warwick, ifs and cepr, uk cdepartment of economics, social science centre, university of western ontario, london, ontario, canada n6a 5c2 received 24 february 2004 received in revised form 19 october 2006 accepted 26 october 2006 available online 29 january 2007 abstract this paper explores the theoretical relationship between tax relief for private giving and individual location choice. tax relief for giving may receive political support at the local level because of its distributional effects however, through its effects on public provision choices, such relief may affectindividual location decisions and, in so doing, has an impact on the jurisdictional configurations that canarise in equilibrium. for some demographic parameters it will promote economic segregation rather than integration, while for others, the opposite is true. in the former scenario, a ban on local tax incentives for giving would be pareto improving and would thus be sanctioned by a majority supported federal taxconstitution.
 2006 elsevier b.v . all rights reserved.
jel classification h2 h7 keywords private provision of public goods jurisdiction formation 1. introduction in policy and political circles there appears to be a belief that voluntarism is a valuable tool for community building and social capital enhancement. one need not look far to find statements tothis effect made by politicians and other governmental authorities. for example, george bush sr.,in accepting the nomination for president in 1988, made the phrase a thousand points of light  synonymous with an america consisting of diverse individuals working together to keep the country strong. other examples abound. in 1997, sheila copps, the minister of canadian heritage developed an action plan called strengthening and celebrating canada for the newjournal of public economics 91 1095 1118 www.elsevier.com locate econbase  corresponding author.
e mail address aslivins uwo.ca .
0047 2727 see front matter 2006 elsevier b.v. all rights reserved.
doi 10.1016 j.jpubeco.2006.10.006millennium . a key component of both plans was to develop strategies to encourage community, civic and citizen participation in activities that are partial substitutes for governmental policies. avariety of arguments have been put forward as to why such private activity is beneficial, but thecommon thread in all of them is the idea that individual involvement in voluntary activities in thecommunity generates positive group externalities. the promotion of policies intended to fosterprivate voluntary behavior is thus based on the supposition not just that the involvement of private citizens in community level activities yield benefits for those communities but also that policies designed to promote such involvement yield the desired outcomes. while the former suppositionmay or may not be valid, the latter may be questioned. economists are all familiar with thephenomenon of unintended consequences of policy decisions . what this paper investigates is the possibility that policies intended to promote voluntary action whatever may be the community level externalities such action generates can actually produce social division as an unintended effect, which in turn leads to a reduction in voluntary activity. in fact we find this to bethe case in suitably large societies, while also finding that such policies can enhance private activity in smaller populations.
our analysis starts from the observation that the structure of communities is endogenous, and can itself be affected by public policy a point that has been recognized since the work of tiebout . the basic premise of all tiebout type models of local public choice is that individuals vote with their feet choosing the community in which they reside on the basis of the package of taxes and local goods each community offers. it follows that policies that alter thesemixes will affect individual location decisions, and thereby influence the demographic structureof communities. the specific focus of the present paper is on the impact that subsidies for private provision of local public goods have on the structure of local jurisdictions specifically, it investigates whether subsidies lead to a world in which communities are more diverse or lessdiverse as far as we know this focus is novel. in order to examine the connections betweenprivate provision and community building, our model must allow for endogenous jurisdictionformation. very little literature exists on the implications of private provision for segregation andjurisdiction formation. horstmann and scharf focus on the impact of income inequality on private provision and community segregation. the paper does not explore the reverse linkage  the impact of private provision on community building. much of the rest of the literature on noncooperative giving behavior assumes an exogenous jurisdiction structure and focuses on various aspects of individual free riding.
1there are other literatures concerned with group formation by mobile agents, including a large literature on clubs, and a more recent literature onthe formation of nations.
2however, none of this work analyzes the interaction between public and private activity.
our analysis shows that subsidies for private provision shift the burden for public good provision off certain groups of individuals and on to other groups. this shift affects the incentivesthat individuals have to locate in particular communities and, by so doing, has an impact on the incentives for individuals to reside in jurisdictions with particular demographic structures. in some circumstances this will induce dissimilar groups of individuals to reside in separatecommunities, and the subsidies can then be seen as promoting economic segregation rather thanintegration. in other circumstances they induce heterogeneous individuals to reside in a singlecommunity, thereby promoting integration.
1see for example, andreoni ,andreoni and bergstrom ,bergstrom, blume and varian , bernheim ,roberts , and warr .
2see, for example, alesina and spolaore for a summary.1096 i.j. horstmann et al. journal of public economics 91 1095 1118in order to illustrate our points, we describe a stylized political economy model of private and public provision of a single public good. the model has two types of individuals,heterogeneous only in their willingness to pay for the public good. the public good can befinanced through taxation and or private contributions. although our analysis applies to alldemographic configurations, we concentrate on the case in which individuals who value thepublic good less are in a majority in the population. this is because when the opposite is true, there is never any private giving in any equilibrium of our model. individuals choose where to live there is endogenous jurisdiction formation then vote over tax public good packages.
subsequently, each individual has the option to engage in noncooperative private provision ofthe public good.
we first focus on a scenario where no tax financed subsidies for private contributions are permitted. one can think of this case as a situation in which there is a constitutional ban on suchsubsidies. we show that there are two kinds of potential jurisdictional equilibria in this case. onehas all individuals living together in a single jurisdiction while the other has individuals segregated into two separate jurisdictions, with segregation based on willingness to pay. the single jurisdiction outcome is always an equilibrium segregation occurs as an additional outcomewhen there are sufficiently many high willingness to pay individuals. in the single jurisdictioncase, private provision occurs when the total population is small and tax provision occurs whenthe population is large. the segregated outcome always has tax provision in both jurisdictions.
we then examine a scenario where a majority can choose to adopt tax incentives for private giving as part of the tax public good package. our finding here is that there are populationdistributions for which segregation is an equilibrium when tax incentives are allowed but is not an equilibrium when tax incentives are banned. this occurs when the overall population is relatively large, so that we view it as the leading case. in essence, the availability of tax incentives forprivate giving can lead to segregation. the reason for this outcome is that subsidies for giving area cheaper way for the low willingness to pay majority to provide the public good than areuniversal taxes. subsidies induce the high willingness to pay individuals to engage in privateprovision and so load a disproportional share of the cost of the public good on these individuals.high willingness to pay individuals recognize that this tax shifting will occur if they live togetherwith low willingness to pay individuals and so they choose to segregate under demographic conditions that would induce integration if subsidies were not available. it is also true that for relatively small populations, there are population distributions for which segregation is anequilibrium when tax incentives are not allowed while segregation cannot arise in equilibriumwhen they are. this happens when the low preference majority would choose to rely entirely onprivate provision when there is a single heterogeneous jurisdiction a phenomenon only likely toarise in a very small population. in this case, the availability of a subsidy will again be takenadvantage of by the majority, but here it lifts some of the burden of provision from the high preference minority, and so renders them less interested in segregating.
finally, we look at the political incentives for individuals to adopt a ban on tax incentives for giving. we find that the ban will be approved by a majority of individuals if and only if we are in the situation in which the ban would result in segregation nolonger being an equilibrium. this finding implies that promoting private provision through thelocal tax system could actually produce a perverse effect on segregation and that, because of thispossible effect, they would be banned by a majority supported federal tax constitution. taxincentives for giving offered at the level of central taxation, on the other hand, do not have anyeffect on segregation, and would therefore be used. this prediction is consistent with the features of real world federal tax systems, where tax relief for private giving is generally offered at the1097 i.j. horstmann et al. journal of public economics 91 1095 1118central rather than at the local level despite the fact that a large proportion of private donations is towards public goods and services that are local in nature.3 2. the model consider an economy in which there are nn2 individuals, each of whom consumes a private consumption good and a single pure local public good. each individual has an endowment of income, w, which is the same for all individuals. individuals differ in their preferences over the private consumption and public goods. for simplicity, we assume that there are two types ofindividuals, i 1, 2, and that all individuals of a given type have identical preferences. the preferences for a type iindividual are represented by the utility function u i ci z ci mi z i 1 2 1  where ciis private consumption for an individual of type i,a n d zis the level of collective consumption. the functions mia r ei n c r e a s i n gi n z, strictly concave and such that lim z 0 m .w ea s s u m et h a t m2 nm1 for all z type 2 individuals value the public good comparatively more at the margin than type 1 individuals do. the population is comprised of ni individuals of type i,i 1 ,2 ,w i t h n1 n2 n.w ea s s u m et h a t n1nn2 1, i.e., the low preference individuals are a non trivial majority in the overall population. the reason for this assumption is that,when n 2nn1 1, the equilibria of the game never involve private provision and so the issues in which we are interested do not arise. thus, we consider only situations with the low preference type as the overall majority.
individuals can choose the jurisdiction in which they live, with jurisdiction membership determining individual access to the local public good. the number of individuals of each type ina jurisdiction is public information, but their identity is private information. as a result, taxes ineach jurisdiction cannot be directly conditioned on an individual s type. in what follows weassume that the tax authorities are not able to use some preferencerevelation mechanism to induce tax discrimination so that taxes within a jurisdiction are uniform.each agent can be a member of at most one jurisdiction and obtains no utility from the public good provided in other jurisdictions.
taxes within jurisdictions are chosen by majority voting and it is assumed that the only tax instruments available to regional governments are lump sum taxes. if the government injurisdiction jsets a lump sum tax, t j, and there are njindividuals in jurisdiction j, then tax revenues in jarenjtj. the provision of public goods can be funded by tax revenues and or voluntary contributions. voluntary contributions towards collective consumption made by arepresentative individual of type iin jurisdiction jare denoted as v ij, for i 1 ,2 .i f nijdenotes the 3in the us, local income taxation is on the rise yet tax incentives for giving are only offered at the federal level in spite of some estimates of 97 of contributions aimed at the community in which the giver lives. the only states that do not use income taxes are alaska, florida, nevada, new hampshire and tennessee , texas, washington and wyoming. of the others,rates range from .75 to 6 . rhode island and vermont charge 25 and 24 of the federal taxliability. with respect to local income taxes, as of 1997, 15 states are authorized to use them. others are currently working on authorization . powers of cities to tax in these states vary colorado, delaware, ny, washington restrict taxation power to specific municipalities baltimore, nyc, st. louis, kansas city, philadelphia, columbus among othersall use local income taxes, with rates typically being quite low . nevertheless, as far as we are aware, none offer relief for charitable contributions.1098 i.j. horstmann et al. journal of public economics 91 1095 1118number of type iindividuals in jurisdiction j, then total voluntary contributions by type i individuals in jurisdiction jarenijvij.
the focus of our analysis is the effect of government incentives for private provision on jurisdiction configurations. there are many ways in which government policy can be used to alterthe incentives for private provision. in the relatively simple environment used here, the mostnatural instrument to consider is the granting of a subsidy to private giving, financed from general tax revenues. the ad valorem subsidy rate, s, can be thought of as the proportion of private contributions that citizens can deduct from their tax bills. this is in fact the actual tax treatment ofprivate donations in many countries, including the us.
4given the jurisdiction j s government policy vector, j , private consumption of a type icitizen in jurisdiction jiscij w tj  vij, the level of zin jurisdiction jisgj n1jv1j n2jv2j, and the government budget constraint isgj sj njtj.
we will compare two regimes one in which subsidies to private provision are not allowed and one in which sjis a policy choice within jurisdictions.
the sequencing of moves is as follows  0. it is exogenously determined whether jurisdiction level subsidies for private provision are allowed , or not .
1. individual agents simultaneously choose a jurisdiction in which to live. there are n homogeneous possible locations for jurisdictions.
2. given a population composition nj for each jurisdiction j, the tax rate tj, level of public spending on z,gj, and the subsidy rate sj, are set in each jurisdiction. these policy parameters, denoted as j , are chosen by a citizen of the majority type, and must be chosen from the set b , where  b0 nj f tj sj gjjsj 0 tja 0 w c138 gj njtjg and bs nj f tj sj gjjsja 0 1 c138 tja 0 w c138 andgj tjnj sjw sj gj g these two sets contain the policy choices that balance the government s budget along the equilibrium path under the no subsidy and subsidy regimes respectively. the variable  gives the equilibrium level of private provision from stage 3 of the game given the stage 2 choices of sj,gjand given that tax revenue must cover the subsidy to this private giving.5 3. agents in each jobserve jand simultaneously choose non negative levels of private provision for the public good. total provision of the local public good in jurisdiction jis the sum of public and private funding in j, which we denote as gjandvj, respectively.
in each subsidy regime, we will determine the set of symmetric, sub game perfect equilibria, and then compare the equilibrium sets for the two regimes. we impose symmetry only to determine the levels of individual private provision at stage 3, as there are an infinity of combinations of individual giving by agents of each type that can arise as equilibrium 4actual tax systems, as well as any subsidies to private provision, are of course considerably more complicated than this. in particular, there is often an upper limit on the subsidy a taxpayer can earn through private donations. we willignore such complications in our analysis.
5it will be shown below that in fact sj,gjare the only parameters that influence equilibrium contributions in stage 3.1099 i.j. horstmann et al. journal of public economics 91 1095 1118continuations. this multiplicity is the result of our assumption that individual preferences are quasi linear in c. all combinations result in the same level of vj.
3. preliminary results in this section, we develop a series of preliminary results that serve to limit the set of possible equilibrium continuation strategies for our game. these results reveal the basic logic that drives our main results in the following section and make those results simpler to derive. in whatfollows, when it is clear that we are analyzing behavior in a particular jurisdiction, we will dropthe jurisdictional subscripts and superscripts from most variables. the term equilibrium means  subgame perfect equilibrium and equilibrium values of choice variables will be denoted with a  . we begin by analyzing behavior in the last stage of the game.
3.1. private provision choices consider an arbitrary jurisdiction j, consisting of n 1jindividuals of type 1 and n2jindividuals of type 2. suppose that the public policy regime is given by . then, the private provision choice for an individual of type i,vi, must be a solution to  miv g v i vi 1 s v0 i 1 2 2   miv g v i vi 1 s c138vi 0 i 1 2 3  where v iis private giving by all other agents in the jurisdiction. we will assume in what follows that when is satisfied for type 2 individuals, so that v2n0,wis large enough that v2b  for all bs. this simple observation leads to our first result.
lemma 1. in any jurisdiction j,we have that if n 2jn0, then for any b the equilibrium continuation strategy of any type 1 residents of j must have v 1 0, and if n2j 0 then there is no b which type 1 individuals can choose that yields a higher continuation payoff than , 0, g 1t nj , where gt 1nj argmax gw g nj m1g no   lemma 1 means that we need only consider the high valuation individuals as potential private contributors to zin any heterogeneous jurisdiction. states the obvious fact that in a jurisdiction consisting of only type 1 individuals they can do no better than to set anoptimal tax. they can in fact realize the same outcome with an appropriate subsidy, s tn0, however we will assume they simply use pure public provision. together these results mean thatonly type 2 individuals private giving behavior needs to be considered.
further, we know that if type 2 individuals are engaged in private giving, it must be that total private contributions, v, satisfy m 2v g v 1 s 4  an implication of this condition is that, if there is private provision in equilibrium, the total amount contributed depends only on the values of gandschosen in the jurisdiction. we let 2  denote total giving by the type 2 individuals given policy choices . since, from , g v2 2, where 2 is the inverse of m2 , the value of 2 is given as w2 s g maxf0 q2 s gg 5 1100 i.j. horstmann et al. journal of public economics 91 1095 1118the function 2captures the equilibrium aggregate donation behavior of the type 2 individuals in any jurisdiction for any s,gchosen.
note that the maximization of utility by type 2 individuals only determines the total level of private provision. it is here that we use the symmetry restriction to define private giving by eachtype 2 individual in jurisdiction j as  2 n2j.
3.2. policy choices stage 2 of the game is the political stage in which the policy vector is determined. in general the policy outcome in any jurisdiction will be a function of which regime is in force subsidies for giving permitted or not as well as of the demographic make up of the jurisdiction the number of type 1 and type 2 individuals. we show in what follows that there are three broadcategories of policy regimes within a jurisdiction that can emerge in any equilibrium. we describeeach below and then delineate the situations in which each might occur.
the simplest case is one in which government plays no role in the provision of z s t g 0.
this is the case of pure private provision in which the policy vector is given by . in this case z  2 and the jurisdiction gets only the level of public good that its type 2 citizens are willing to finance privately, with no tax subsidy. we will let 2 z2vand note that m2 1.
the second possibility is pure public provision. this is the case in which gis sufficiently high, given s, that 2 0. in this case the value of gis given by total tax revenues so that g njt.
with pure public provision, and if type iindividuals are in the majority, their optimal choice of g is gt 1nj c0 c1  arg max gw g nj mig no  6  and the corresponding tax is ti git nj. the level of zis, as a consequence, determined by the condition  miv gt i nj 1 nj 7  where iis the majority type. for future reference, we denote the policy vector for this case as  , 0, git .6 the third possible outcome is a subsidized private provision outcome and occurs only if subsidies to giving are permitted. for this case, the policy vector takes the form and it induces an outcome of pure subsidized private provision. all taxes collected are used solely to finance the subsidy on private provision s 2 tnj. the level of zin a jurisdiction that adopts such a policy is equal to 2 and is therefore determined solely by the value of s.a sa result, the general structure of such a policy choice is nj,s, 0 .
there are of course many other feasible choices in any jurisdiction. however, only the above three types of policy vectors can arise as equilibrium outcomes. the next two lemmas demonstrate this result as well as the conditions under which each of the three policy vector types arise.
lemma 2. in either subsidy regime and in any jurisdiction j, in which type 2 individuals are the majority, the equilibrium policy choice will be such that 2 0.
6since there is no private giving, the level of s,i fsn0 is permitted, is indeterminate in this case all ssuch that 2 0 yield the same outcome. we assume, without loss of generality, that when pure public provision is the optimal policy choice, s 0 is chosen.1101 i.j. horstmann et al. journal of public economics 91 1095 1118we already know from lemma 1 that only type 2 individuals ever engage in private provision.
this lemma indicates that a type 2 majority always finds it advantageous to rely on the tax systemrather than private provision. the tax system forces type 1 individuals to contribute to z, something they will not do if there is private provision.
the equilibrium policy choices of a type 1 majority are more varied, depending on both the subsidy regime and the demographic make up of a jurisdiction. the next result provides the details.
lemma 3. if subsidies for private provision are not allowed, and type 1 is in the majority in a given jurisdiction, then there exists a n 0n1 such that h t g 0 0 if njbn0and nj 2n0   t g t1 nj gt 1 nj if njzn0or nj 2 0 c26  8   if subsidies for private provision are permitted and type 1 is in the majority in a given jurisdiction in which njn0, then there is a nssuch that h t s g 0 0 0 if njbns   t s g s nj w2 s nj 0 nj s nj 0 if njzns c26  9  where s nj c0 c1  arg max sw sw2 s 0  nj m1w2s 0 c26 c27  10  if n 2j 0, then , 0, g 1t .
part of the lemma lays out the two policy choices a type 1 majority might adopt in equilibrium, if subsidies to giving are not permitted. when the jurisdiction is small , the tax price of the public good, 1 njis large. as a result, the majority relies entirely on the private giving of the type 2 minority. the majority s utility in this case is  v 1uw m1 zv 2 11  once the jurisdiction is large enough, the tax price of the public good is low enough that the majority is better off using tax financing. doing so gives them a payoff of  t 1nj c0 c1 uw gt nj  nj m1gtnj c0 c1 c0 c1  12  this payoff is increasing in njwhile the payoff to the majority under a pure private provision policy, 1v, is independent of nj. as a result, there is a critical value n0for the jurisdictional population at which the optimal policy choice changes for a type 1 majority.
part of the lemma demonstrates one of the key insights of our model. once the option of setting subsidies for private provision is opened up, the low preference majority never uses the tax system to finance zif the jurisdiction includes any high preference individuals gis always zero. all provision is done privately by the type two individuals and the only issue for themajority is the size of the subsidy to provide. the tax system is used only to raise the funds neededto pay the subsidy.1102 i.j. horstmann et al. journal of public economics 91 1095 1118the reason that gis zero in this case is familiar from the literature on private provision. with gn0, and 2n0, the majority can always do better by lowering g, since the type 2 citizens will respond at stage 3 by increasing their giving to completely offset the loss of g . total taxes will drop by dollars for every dollar decrease in g, but zwill not change. a tax financed subsidy is a better instrument for the majority than direct tax financingofg, since taxes are levied uniformly, whereas a subsidy, although available to all, is targeted at high preference citizens via self selection. by creating differential contributions to the public good, the subsidy shifts the cost for provision from the majority to the minority.
the utility of a type 1 individual from the optimal positive subsidy is w s nj w2 s nj 0  nj m1w2s nj c0 c1  0 c0 c1 c0 c1 u s 1nj c0 c1  13  one can show that s increases with njand that 2increases with s. the former follows from the fact that the individual tax burden of subsidization is less the larger is nj the latter is a result of the fact that is the subsidized price for zandzis normal. since the payoff to a type 1 individual is increasing in njwhen sis fixed, it also must be when sis adjusted optimally 1s is increasing in nj. hence, there again exists a critical value, ns, at which the policy choice of the type 1 majority changes to one of active subsidization.
3.3. jurisdictional outcomes the results above detail the possible equilibrium choices in the last two stages of the game. in principle, there are a large array of jurisdictional configurations that can arise at stage 1, since we do not limit the set of locations in any way. however, the results of lemma 3 allow us to prove afinal preliminary result which indicates that in fact there are only two possible configurations inequilibrium. the proof of this result, as well as some of those that follow, are made simpler if wemake two additional assumptions regarding the elasticity of demand for collective consumption.
consider a type icitizen elected as political decision maker in jurisdiction jchoosing a utility maximizing level of g, taking as given that s 0 and knowing that no private provision will result. the level of gin this situation is g it. it can be thought of as the level of spending onzd e s i r e db yat y p e icitizen facing a tax price of 1 nforg.t h e tax price elasticity of this demand is  njagt i nj anj gt i nj uet inj c0 c1  14  analogously, when a set of type 2 individuals is privately providing z, faced with a subsidy set at any s 0 and a level of public provision of g 0, 2 is the level of zthey will provide at thesubsidized price 1 s. in this case the subsidy price elasticity of this demand is  1 s aw2 s 0 as w2 s 0 uess 15  our results so far imply that these elasticities are all negative. throughout the rest of the analysis, we impose the restriction that they are less than one in absolute value. this assumption1103 i.j. horstmann et al. journal of public economics 91 1095 1118of price inelasticity is sufficient for the results we derive but is by no means necessary. under this restriction we can prove the following  lemma 4. there are at most two equilibrium jurisdictional configurations a single jurisdiction containing all citizens and two jurisdictions, each containingcitizens of a single type .
4. equilibrium configurations and subsidies in this section we analyze the jurisdictional equilibria, the situations in which they arise and how they are affected by whether or not the majority can employ subsidies for giving. in this way, we can examine the impact that such subsidies have on economic segregation. we beginwith the case in which subsidies are constitutionally disallowed we follow with the situation inwhich subsidies for giving are allowed and are chosen in the way described above. finally, weask whether or not individuals would want to impose a constitutional ban on subsidies forgiving.
4.1. the no subsidy case from lemma 4 we know that there are only ever two possible jurisdiction configurations  either all citizens reside in a single jurisdiction, which must therefore have type 1 as its majority,or there are two jurisdictions populated by the two different types. to determine whether eitheris an equilibrium configuration, we must determine whether any citizen would prefer to changetheir location, taking into account the equilibrium continuation that would follow from theirdoing so.
consider the single jurisdiction outcome first. if subsidies for giving are not permitted, then lemma 3 above applies. the policy outcome in equilibrium will be pure private provision if nbn 0, and ,g1t if n n0. the only possible deviations from such an equilibrium are that an individual forms a separate jurisdiction. it is immediate that a type 1individual never finds such a deviation profitable since the policies in the single jurisdiction areoptimal for type 1 and there are more citizens to tax.
a type 2 individual in the single jurisdiction gets utility of   v 2n2 c0 c1  w zv 2 n2 m2zv 2 c0 c1  16  when nbn0 and  t 2n w gt 1 n  n m2gt 1n c0 c1  17  when n n0. it is clear then that defecting from this single jurisdiction cannot be profitable for a type 2 individual when nbn0, as the deviator would face private provision with no cocontributors.
when nnn0, the type 1 majority prefers a policy of pure public provision to one of pure private provision. since the type 1 individual pays taxes under a pure public provision policy, it must be that the pure public provision policy provides a higher level of the public good than does the pure private provision policy g1tnz2v. this fact in turn implies that a type 2 individual who1104 i.j. horstmann et al. journal of public economics 91 1095 1118stays in the single jurisdiction gets more gthan if he defects and gets it at a lower price .
this, coupled with the fact that g1tbg2t, imply that the type 2 individual is better off staying in the single jurisdiction. this analysis implies the following result  proposition 1. a single heterogeneous jurisdiction is always an equilibrium outcome if subsidies to private provision are not allowed .
as for the two jurisdiction outcome, arguments similar to the above demonstrate that it is never in any individual s interest to live in autarky. it is also not in the interest of a type 1individual to move to the type 2 jurisdiction. the reason is that the type 1 individual pays both ahigher tax price for z by lemma 2 the type 2 majority always chooses a tax regime and 1 n 1b1   and consumes more gthan is individually optimal for him at this higher price since g1tbg2t for any n .
ifn1 1bn0, then a type 2 individual who moves to the type 1 jurisdiction will be  exploited by the type 1 majority. in this case, as indicated by lemma 3, the policy is pure private provision by the lone type 2 individual. because the price of the public good is 1 rather than 1 n2in this case, the deviating type 2 individual provides less of the public good than type 2 individuals provide in the type 2 jurisdiction z2vrather than g2t. the deviating individual also pays the entire cost. as a result, a type 2 individual has no incentive to move inthis situation.
ifn 1 1nn0, then a pure public provision policy is adopted in the type 1 jurisdiction even if a type 2 individual moves there. in this case, even though the type 2 individual does not obtain thepreferred amount of gin the type 1 jurisdiction, the tax price is lower than in the type 2 jurisdiction 1 b1 n2. as a result, a move to the type 1 jurisdiction may make a type 2 individual better off. this is more likely to be the case when n2is small relative to n1since, in this situation, a type 2 individual obtains a large reduction in the tax price by moving. morespecifically, the move will pay for a type 2 individual if and only if   t 2n1 1 w gt 1 n1 1  n1 1 m2gt 1n1 1 c0 c1 nw gt 2 n2  n2  m2gt 2n2 c0 c1 uct 2n2 18  if we define the function n2a sn2 min n2 2t t , then the move pays ifn2 n2 and does not otherwise.7 7the function n2 gives the smallest value of n2such that it pays for a type 2 individual to stay in a jurisdiction with n2type 2 members rather than move to a type 1 jurisdiction with n1members. note that n2 is increasing in n1 and such that n1nn2. the latter follows from the fact that the type 1 jurisdiction underprovides gfrom the type 2 s perspective. to see the former, note that act 2 n2  an2 gt 2 n2   n2 2n0  using the fact that m2 1 n2. also, we have that a t 2 n1 1  an1 gtv 1n1 1 m2vgt 1n1 1 c0 c1  1  n1 1 c20 c21  gt 1 n1 1   n1 1 2n0  since m2 nm1 1 .1105 i.j. horstmann et al. journal of public economics 91 1095 1118we have, then, the following result  proposition 2. two homogenous jurisdictions is an equilibrium outcome when subsidies to private provision are not allowed if and only if either  1. n 1bn0 1 or 2. n 1nn0 1 and n 2nn2.
in essence, the two jurisdiction configuration arises for two sorts of demographics, those in which the population has small numbers of low valuation individuals andthose in which the population is large and there are sufficiently similar numbers of low and highvaluation individuals. fig. 1 depicts the set of demographic parameter configurations, , for which a configuration with two homogenous jurisdictions is an equilibrium when subsidies for private provision are not allowed. j1 is always an equilibrium configuration, as shown.
4.2. subsidies for private provision suppose now that subsidies for private provision are constitutionally permissible . what effect does the availability of this policy instrument have on jurisdictionconfigurations for the case of the single mixed jurisdiction, it is immediate that a type 1individual will never defect from such a jurisdiction, by the same reasoning used when subsidieswere not available. further, if nbn s, a type 2 individual will not defect, again by the same reasoning as before, since there is no subsidy to private provision in the single jurisdiction in this situation . if nnns, the utility of a type 2 individual in the mixed jurisdiction is w s n 1 s n2 c18 c19 w2s m2w2s ux2s n n2 19  with s s .8this same individual s utility in autarky is x2 0 1 1 w w2 0 m2 w2 0 20  fig. 1.
8since we know that in equilibrium, g 0 always, we will henceforth drop the argument gfrom the function 2.1106 i.j. horstmann et al. journal of public economics 91 1095 1118the function 2 is increasing in both nandn2and increases when s is adjusted optimally as nincreases . therefore, it must be that 2,n, n2 n 2, and so it can never pay for a type 2 individual to move from the single jurisdiction when nnns.
we have then the following proposition  proposition 3. a single jurisdiction is an equilibrium outcome for all values of , when subsidies for giving are permitted .
the implication of proposition 3 is that any impact that subsidies for giving have must be on the tendency for individuals to segregate into separate jurisdictions. the issue is whethersubsidies expand the set of circumstances in which segregation occurs or reduces this set. to answer this question we need to identify the set of demographics for which the two jurisdiction configuration is an equilibrium.
so consider a two jurisdiction outcome. as before, a type 1 individual has no incentive to move to a type two jurisdiction. the reason is as before namely that, by lemma 2, the type 2jurisdiction only ever uses pure public provision and a so type 1 individual pays a higher tax priceand obtains a less preferred level of the public good by moving to a type 2 jurisdiction.
as for a move by a type 2 individual to the type 1 jurisdiction, if n 1 1bns, then lemma 3 implies that such a move produces a pure private provision policy in which the lone type 2 individual is the sole provider of the public good. as before, this outcome makes the type 2 individual worse off. if n1 1nns, then the type 2 individual faces a subsidised private provision policy when moving to the type 1 jurisdiction. in this case, the type 2 individual obtains utility of payoff x2 s n1 1 n1 1 1 21  when moving to the type 1 jurisdiction. the move pays if and only if this utility is greater than  2t, the utility from staying in the segregated type 2 jurisdiction. analogously to before, we can define the function n2s giving the smallest value of n2such that a type 2 individual prefers fig. 2.1107 i.j. horstmann et al. journal of public economics 91 1095 1118staying in the type 2 jurisdiction to moving to a type 1 jurisdiction with n1individuals. this function is increasing in n1and is defined by ns 2 n1 uminfn2jct 2 n2 zx2 s n1 1 n1 1 1 g 22  as before, the type 2 individual moves if n2 n2s. we have, therefore, the following proposition  proposition 4. when subsidies to private giving are allowed, there is an increasing function n 2s such that a two jurisdiction configuration is an equilibrium outcome if and only if either 1. n 1bns 1 or 2. n 1 ns 1 and n 2 n2s.
we are now in a position to analyze how the equilibrium set changes when subsidies for giving are allowed. as noted above, our answer turns on a comparison of propositions 2 and 4. this comparison in turn depends on the magnitude of nsrelative to n0and on the value of n2 relative to n2s for any n1.
proposition 5. n0nns, and n 2nn2s for any n 1.
the result implies that when n1is large , subsidies for private provision enlarge the set of demographics for which the two jurisdiction configuration is an equilibrium. in fig. 2 , the set of for which subsidies allow for the existence of the separate jurisdictional equilibrium when it would not exist without subsidies, is marked as na. the existence of this region gives the sense in which subsidies for private provision increase economic segregation.the reason is essentially the following. tax financed subsidies for private provision of publicgoods are a way of inducing high demanders to self select into providing a larger share of thefinancing of public goods. if a low demand majority is given the right to implement suchsubsidies, then the availability of this policy tool increases the incentive for high demanders tosegregate themselves into communities consisting of other high demanders. doing so lets them avoid the differential burden that would result if they lived in a mixed community. thus, for large n, the subsidies can lead to communities that are more homogeneous and in this sense, decrease the amount of social cohesion.
when n 1is small but not too small and high valuation individuals are a sufficiently small minority then the opposite is true the existence of subsidies eliminates the possibility of a two jurisdiction equilibrium when it would exist in their absence. theset of for which subsidies have this effect is depicted as nbinfig. 2 . the intuition for this phenomenon is that with a small polity all living in one jurisdiction, tax financed provision of gis too costly for the low valuation majority. thus, the equilibrium outcome in the single jurisdiction is pure private provision. if subsidies are allowed, they are used, and this reduces the burden on the high valuation minority relative to what they would bear without subsidies, and this prevents them fromsegregating. in this small polity situation, then, subsidies do promote integration.
it is highly intuitive that in a polity with a relatively low population, the burden of public provision will be high the self selection that subsidies allow for increases the efficiency of public provision,making it the preferred political choice when it would otherwise not be. this allows public provisionto dominate pure private provision which in turn allows the advantage of large numbers to overcome the disadvantages of a heterogeneous community.1108 i.j. horstmann et al. journal of public economics 91 1095 11184.3. constitutional choices up to now we have treated the existence of tax financed subsidies to private provision as exogenous. it is reasonable to ask what the model can say about the outcome of an ex antepolitical decision to allow such subsidies. that is, what would happen if, at stage zero of ourgame, individuals could vote on a constitutional ban against the adoption of subsidies by local jurisdictions we pursue this question here under the supposition that individuals know their type when they vote and that the outcome of this single vote will determine whether or not subsidiesare banned in all jurisdictions that might form at later stages.
the answer to this question depends on the demographic makeup of the overall polity. more specifically, we can conclude from the preceding analysis that there are three distinct sets ofdemographics that must be considered. if we let n n1 n2 1 , these three sets are defined as  nauf n1 n2 anjn1nn0 1 and n2 n1 nn2nns 2 n1 g 23  nbuf n1 n2 anjns 1bn1bn0 1 and n2bns 2 n1 g 24  n0unq n a n b 25  the set nais the set of demographic parameters for which the introduction of subsidies to private provision makes the j2 configuration possible in equilibrium when it would otherwise not be. alternatively, it is the set of n for which banning subsidies eliminates the possibility of a j2 equilibrium. nbis the set of parameters for which banning subsidies makes the j2 configuration a possible equilibrium outcome when it would otherwise not be. n0is the set for which the presence of subsidies has no effect on the set of possible equilibrium configurations.
inn0and under the assumption that individuals do not directly coordinate their location choices on the constitutional structure , type 1 individuals weakly prefer no ban on subsidies while type 2 individualsweakly prefer a ban. to see this, note that both types are indifferent to a ban if the equilibriumconfiguration is j2 since subsidies are not used. both types are also indifferent if the equilibrium configuration is j1 but subsidies are not adopted by the type 1 majority, as occurs when nbn s.
when the equilibrium configuration is j1 and subsidies are employed, if permitted, their use makes type 1 individuals strictly better off and type 2 individuals strictly worse off. therefore, if amajority vote is required to ban subsidies for giving, they will not be banned for nan 0.
innb, banning subsidies makes j2 an equilibrium configuration when it would not be in the presence of subsidies. thus, the equilibrium configuration will necessarily be j1 if subsidies are permitted. if the ban on subsidies leaves the equilibrium outcome j1, then the type 1 individuals are worse off they are no longer able to use a subsidy which they find optimal without the ban.type 2 individuals are also worse off if nbn 0since, in this case, the policy under the ban is pure private provision so that they obtain less of the public good and pay a higher price for it. if, on theother hand, n n 0then the ban makes type 2 individuals better off since the policy regime is pure tax provision under a ban but subsidised private provision without it. if the ban results in a change to aj2 equilibrium configuration, both types of individuals are worse off. the reason is obvious1109 i.j. horstmann et al. journal of public economics 91 1095 1118for the type 1 individuals. as for type 2 individuals, the fact that j2 is not an equilibrium configuration with subsidies means that a type 2 individual prefers to be in the type 1 jurisdictioneven if this individual is the lone but subsidized contributor to the public good. as a consequence,type 2 individuals must certainly prefer to be together in a single jurisdiction with subsidies. wehave then that, for n b, a constitutional ban on subsidies is majority opposed and is unanimously opposed if nbn0.
inna,j1 is the only equilibrium configuration if subsidies are banned. if, when subsidies are permitted, j1 is also the equilibrium outcome, then the ban makes type 1 individuals worse off and type 2 individuals better off. the reason is as above. if, however, the equilibrium is j2 when subsidies are permitted, then a ban necessarily changes the outcome to j1. both types of individuals are made better off in this case and so a constitutional ban on subsidies will receiveuniversal support.
5. conclusion our analysis shows that the availability of subsidies for private giving can lead individuals to segregate into separate jurisdictions. whether or not such segregation occurs depends on the sizeof the polity. when the polity is relatively large, the public good will be provided solely throughtaxes if subsidies for giving are not available and both high and low willingness to payindividuals reside in the same jurisdiction. in this case, high willingness to pay individuals find itinexpensive to live in a mixed jurisdiction relative to segregating into a separate jurisdiction.when subsidies are available, they will be used by a low willingness to pay majority in order to shift the tax burden off themselves and on to the high willingness to pay minority should both types of individuals reside in the same jurisdiction. when the polity is relatively large, the highwillingness to pay individuals find this tax shifting expensive relative to segregating in a separatejurisdiction. the result is that subsidies for giving can result in segregation between groups.
when the polity is relatively small, the availability of subsidies for giving can be a force for integration instead. this is the case whenever the polity is so small that, even when both typesreside in a single jurisdiction, all provision of the public good is through private provision by highwillingness to pay individuals. in this case, the availability of a subsidy for private giving shifts some of the burden for provision off the high willingness to pay individuals and on to the low willingness to pay ones. in so doing the subsidy acts as a force for integration, making a mixedjurisdiction more attractive to high willingess to pay types. while these results were derivedunder the assumption of quasi linear preferences so that mixed public and private provision neveroccurred, the basic intuition underlying the results applies for more general preferences. evenunder mixed provision, a subsidy shifts the cost of provision off one group and onto another thiscost shifting feature of the subsidy drives the location decisions. so for instance, even undermixed provision and with a large polity, a subsidy shifts the cost of provision from the low willingness to pay individuals and on to the high willingness to pay ones. this potential cost shifting is what deters a high willingness to pay individual from locating in a jurisdiction withlow willingness to pay types and so supports the segregation outcome.
whether or not individuals wish to institute a constitutional ban on subsidies for giving depends on which sort of polity they expect to prevail. as a general principle, individuals prefer aconstitutional regime that promotes mixed jurisdictions and discourages segregation. if the polityis a relatively small one, so that subsidies for giving discourage segregation, then individualsunanimously prefer subsidies. if, on the other hand, the polity is a large one and individuals anticipate that segregation will occur if subsidies for giving are permitted, then they unanimously1110 i.j. horstmann et al. journal of public economics 91 1095 1118prefer a ban on subsidies for giving. these results suggest a potential explanation for the observation that tax deductions for charitable giving are uncommon at the local level and are morecommon at higher jurisdictional levels.
finally, the reader may wonder why we restrict attention to the case of n 1nn2 1. analysis of the case n2nn1 1 is certainly possible. note, however, that the results for stages 2 and 3 of the game are unchanged as they do not depend on the demographic assumption. at stage 1, the set of possible equilibrium jurisdictional configurations is also the same. the equilibrium outcomes are different in two ways. first, in no equilibrium is there any private provision or nontrivial use ofsubsidies second, although private provision and subsidies may be used off theequilibrium path for some pairs, the presence or absence of subsidies has no impact on the equilibrium correspondence. given the irrelevance of the availability of subsidies for thestructure of equilibrium with this set of demographic parameters, the analysis was not included inthe paper.
acknowledgements we would like to thank participants in the 2001 cepr public policy symposium, stockholm, the 2003 zie workshop on fiscal federalism, bonn, and seminar participants at the university ofwarwick, the institute for fiscal studies, bristol university, queens university, and the universityof nottingham for comments and suggestions. two anonymous referees provided usefulcomments on an earlier version, and we thank them. research support from the canadian socialsciences and humanities research council is gratefully acknowledged.
appendix a proof of lemma 1. note first that in any jurisdiction, given any chosen for that jurisdiction, the equilibrium continuation strategies of a type i citizen must satisfy  v i g s t arg max vfw t 1 s v mi v i g s t v g g where v i l ivl. therefore, if vin0, it must be that mi 1 s, where v lvl.
 suppose then that n2jn0 in some jurisdiction j, and v1n0. then it must be that m2   nm1 1 s, which is inconsistent with the type 2 individuals choosing equilibrium levels of donations, unless v2 w t, and we have assumed wis large enough that this cannot occur.
 suppose that n2j 0 in some jurisdiction. then it is immediate from the definition of g1t that no with s 0 can be better for type 1 individuals than , 0,g1t nj .when  s, note that g1t satisfies m1 1 nj, which implies that the resulting allocation is pareto efficient. if, however, an sn0 is set that does induce private giving, the resulting level of z must satisfy m1 1 s, which cannot be pareto efficient unless 1 s 1 nj. since in any of these equilibrium continuations, all type 1 individuals get the same payoff, it must be that for any s, the outcome is weakly pareto dominated by the payoff attained with optimal taxes, w g1t  nj m1 ,and so this payoff is at least as great as any with private giving.  proof of lemma 2. suppose that 0. then it is immediate from the definition of g2t that a type 2 citizen can do no better than choosing , 0, g2t nj .1111 i.j. horstmann et al. journal of public economics 91 1095 1118suppose then that sandnj 1 0. then, by the same argument as in the proof of lemma 1, a type 2 citizen cannot get a higher payoff than that which results from the same policy choice. weassume that is what is chosen.
suppose instead that sbut that n j 1n0. suppose also that the equilibrium choice bs is such that 2n0. then by definition tnj g s 2. now, define an alternative policy choice, s 0,t t 2 njandg njt .t h e ni f 2 0, we have that  zv gv njtv njt nj nj 21 s w2s g nnjt 1 s w2s g   njt sw2s g w2s g g w2s g z since m2 1 s, it follows that m2 b1 sb1, so that 2 0, in fact.
thus, by construction we have that njt g s 2 and so b and we have also that  x2v w tv w t 1 s nj 2  w2s g nw t w2 s g  nj 2 x2 sou2bu2, and the original could not therefore be an equilibrium continuation strategy choice for a type 2 majority in any jin which n1jn0.  proof of lemma 3. the following results are for any given jurisdiction.
 suppose s 0 is imposed. the payoff to a type 1 citizen if there is pure private provision,  , is 1v w m1. if there is pure public provision the maximal payoff to a type 1 citizen is 1t w g1t nj m1 . from the definition of g1t we have that g1t nj   1 m1 2n0, so that 1t nj g 2n0. further, m1 bm2 for all gimplies that 1tb 1v. as long as there is a value of njsufficiently large such that g1tnz2v, then  1tn 1vfor some nj. define n0as the value of njat which the inequality switches. the result then follows as long as there are no mixed provision outcomes. since under mixed provision, m2 1 for all g, the type 1 citizen can reduce gwith no impact on z.a s a reduction in glowers the type 1 citizen s taxes, type 1 can increase utility by setting g 0, implying that mixed provision does not occur.
 suppose sn0 is allowed. we first show that it is always preferable for the type 1 majority to choose sandgsuch that 2n0. suppose by way of contradiction, that the sandgchosen are such that 2 0. then it must be that gn 2, from the definition of 2, and t g nj.
however, letting s 1 m2 , it follows that if , then z g 2 and t bt.
thus, results in greater consumption for the type 1 citizen and the same zas in ,s ot h i si ss u p e r i o r .
we now show that choosing g 0 is always optimal. if with gn0a n d 2n0w e r e chosen, then the level of gcan be reduced to 0, with the result that 2 increases by the amount g, in the main text . then in turn total taxes can be r e d u c e db yt h ea m o u n tg, which maintains a balanced government budget, and thus a type 1 individual gets greater c1and the same z. it follows from this that t s 2 nj always, and the only remaining issue is the subsidy. s is the utility maximizing subsidy of type 1, given that g 0. the payoff to a type 1 individual from a subsidy under these conditions is x1s nj c0 c1  w sw2 s  nj m1w2s 1112 i.j. horstmann et al. journal of public economics 91 1095 1118where we have dropped the gfrom the argument of 2, since it will always be 0. if an sn0i s chosen, then it will satisfy the first order condition w2vs m1vw2s s njhi  w2 s  nj 0  note that the only parameter that the maximal swill depend on is nj, and that it must also satisfy the second order condition w2ws m1vw2s 1 s nj c20 c21  m1ww2s w2vs c1382 w2v s  njb0  ifs n0, then it can be shown that s nj a bwhere a s 2 2 2b0, and the second order condition above implies that bb0. thus, s is increasing in nj.
note further that when s 0, the payoff is simply 1 1v, which is in fact independent ofnj.i fa n sn0 is chosen for any nj, then the payoff to a type 1 citizen is w s 2  nj m1 . since 1 is increasing in njfor any given s, it follows that this last expression is increasing in nj, since sis chosen optimally for each value of nj. thus, we let ns be the value of njat which this payoff exceeds 1v. there must be such a value, since if sis fixed at any value s , then 2nz2v, and so for some sufficiently large n , 1n  1v.  the following result will be useful in proving lemma 4.
lemma a. if n nn and g 1tnz2v, then w z2v n m 2bw g1t n m 2  proof. since m2 is concave, we have that  m2 gt 1 nv c0 m2 zv 2 nmv 2 gt 1 nv gt 1 nv c0zv 2  n1 nv gt 1 nv c0zv 2 since mv 2nmv 1  ngt 1 nv  nv c0zv 2 nw since nvnnw  som2gt 1nv c0 c1  gt 1 nv  nvnm2zv 2 c0 c1  zv 2 nwwhich proves lemma a.  proof of lemma 4. this will be proved by proving a series of results.
lemma 4a. there can be at most two jurisdictions in any equilibrium .
the proof consists of two parts. first, we show that any increase in the number of agents in a jurisdiction that leaves the majority type unchanged does not decrease the utility of that type. nextwe show that this result implies that each jurisdiction must have a different type of citizen in themajority, which means there can be at most two jurisdictions in equilibrium. majority type s utility non decreasing in number of citizens in jurisdiction consider a given jurisdiction with n j agents and with type iagents being the majority. let the continuation equilibrium tax public goods package in the jurisdiction be . now consider the addition of another k agents to the jurisdiction, so that n j nj k,k 1, such that type icontinues to be the majority.1113 i.j. horstmann et al. journal of public economics 91 1095 1118we consider two cases  case 1. t n0 a feasible tax public goods package for this larger jurisdiction is  where s s ,g g andt t nj . this package results in the same equilibrium levels of private provision at the last stage of the game, since 2 depends only on s and g, and thus the level of zis the same, and the government budget balances.
however, consumption is higher if t n0, since t is lower. as a result, all the original citizens utilities are strictly higher under , and so the majority type s utility must be higher with the addition of the knew citizens.
case 2. t 0 necessarily then s g 0 also, and it must therefore be that either type 1 is the majority type, or nj 1. if type 2 individuals were in the majority, then lemma 2 implies that v2 v1 0, and nj,0 ,g2t produces a higher payoff for a type 2 citizen, when njn1. if nj 1, it is immediate that the single type i s utility strictly increases if more citizens of any type are added and iremains the majority, since in the enlarged jurisdiction a tn0 can be imposed, with s 0, that makes the original solitary citizen strictly better off. if t 0 and njn1, it must be that type 1 is the majority type, and further, it must be the case that nj 2n0, since if nj 2 0 a tax t1 g1t njn0, would produce a higher payoff for type 1 citizens than does . thus, if t 0 in any jurisdiction with a type 1 majority, it must be that the payoff to the majority is w m1, and that nj 2n0. since the payoff to a type 1 majority is otherwise increasing in the size of the jurisdiction, it follows that once the payoff is greater than this, it is strictly increasinginn jfrom then on.
must be a different majority type in each jurisdiction suppose, by way of contradiction, that there are two jurisdictions, jandl, with type ithe majority type in each. assume, without loss of generality, that nj nl 1.
ifi 2, then part implies that type 2 citizens utility is increasing in each jurisdiction if more citizens are added. hence, a type 2 citizen who moves from ltojwill strictly increase their utility, and so two such jurisdictions cannot be part of an equilibrium configuration.
ifi 1, on the other hand, it follows from that a type 1 citizen s utility cannot decrease as more citizens are added to a jurisdiction, so a type 1 citizen who moves from l to j cannot be worse off. if in fact the move does not increase his utility, then it must be that n2l,n2jn0 and that t 0in l, and in jafter he moves there. if that is the case, then all provision in both jurisdictions is done privately by type 2 individuals, with s 0. assuming without loss of generality that n2j n2l,a type 2 citizen who moves from ltojwill get the same level of public good, z2v, but will have greater consumption, and so be strictly better off. hence, two such jurisdictions still cannot be partof an equilibrium configuration, which proves part .
this proves lemma 4a.  lemma 4b. if s 0 is required, and there are two jurisdictions, then each consists of all citizens of one type.
proof. we already know that each jurisdiction must have a different type in the majority, by lemma 4a, so suppose that, without loss of generality, j 1 has type 1 in the majority, and j 2 has type 2. now, suppose, by way of contradiction, that j 1 includes type 2 citizens. we know from lemma 2 that the payoff to type 2 citizens in j 2 is increasing in n 2, so it must be that u21nu22, otherwise it would pay for a type 2 citizen to deviate from j 1 to j 2. however, the1114 i.j. horstmann et al. journal of public economics 91 1095 1118payoff to a type 2 citizen in j 1 is u1 2 n1 n1 2 w zv 2 n1 2 m2 zv 2 ifn1bn0  w gt 1 n1 n1 m2 gt 1 n1 ifn1zn0 c26 thus, u21is increasing in n1ifn1 n0, meaning a type 2 individual from j 2 would find it profitable to deviate to j 1. thus it must be that n1bn0.i fn1 1bn0, then again a type 2 citizen from j 2 would find it profitable to move to j 1. so, it must be that n1bn0 n1 1.
these inequalities and the fact that u21nu22, imply that in order for it to not be profitable for a type 2 in j 1 to deviate to j 2, it must be that w zv 2 n1 2m2zv 2 c0 c1 nw gt 2 n2  n2 m2gt 2n2 c0 c1 c0 c1 zw gt 1 n1 1  n1 1 m2gt 1n1 1 c0 c1 c0 c1   we also know that at n0,m1 m1 g1t n0, and therefore g1tnz2v, meaning g1tnz2v, since g1tis increasing in n1. this in turn means that in order for the inequality above to hold, it must be that m2 g1t bm2 z2v n1. however, lemma a above implies that this cannot hold. thus, it must be that n1 0.
suppose now that j 2 includes type 1 citizens. part of the proof of lemma 4a implies that u12is increasing in n2so it must be that u2 1bu1 1. since the argument above implies that n1 2 0, it follows that u11 1t, which is strictly increasing in n1, meaning a type 1 citizen in j 2 will be better off if he deviates to j 1.
this proves lemma 4b.  lemma 4c. if there are two jurisdictions and s n0 is allowed, each one contains citizens of only one type .
proof. suppose again that there are two jurisdictions in equilibrium and that jurisdiction jhas type jin the majority. from lemmas 2 and 3 we know that the payoffs in each jurisdiction are as follows. in jurisdiction 1  u1 1n1 c0 c1  arg max sw sw2 s  n1 m1w2s c26 c27   u1 2s n1 n1 2 c0 c1  w sw2 s  n1 1 s w2 s  n1 2 m2w2s  where s s , so that s 0 if n1bns.
in jurisdiction 2 we have u2 1n2 c0 c1  w gt 2 n2  n2 m1gt 2n2 c0 c1 c0 c1   u2 2n2 c0 c1  w gt 2 n2  n2 m2gt 2n2 c0 c1 c0 c1  1115 i.j. horstmann et al. journal of public economics 91 1095 1118it is immediate that u11 is increasing in n1and that u22 is increasing in n2. further, we have that au2 1 n2  a n2 gt 2 n2   n2 21 n2gtv 2 n2  gt 2 n2 c20 c21  gtv 2n2 c0 c1 m1vgt 2n2 c0 c1 c0 c1   we know that the second term on the right hand side of the above is positive, and our elasticity assumption implies the same for the first term, hence u12 is increasing in n2, also, and this immediately implies that there cannot be any type 1 citizens in j 2.
now, note that u21is increasing in n21when nbns, since then u1 2n1 2 c0 c1  w w2 0  n1 2 m2w20  on the other hand, when n nsso that s n0, it must be that s s satisfies the firstorder condition m1vw2s w2vs 1 n1sw2vs w2s 0  further, we have that au1 2 s n n1 2  asjs s m2vw2s m1vw2s c138 w2vs w2 s  n1 21 1 s w2v s  w2 s c20 c21   and this is positive, because of our subsidy price elasticity assumption and the fact that m2 m1 n0 for any s.
then, noting that du1 2 s n2 n1 2  dn1 2 au1 2 s n1 n1 2  asjs s c20 c21as n1  an1an1 an1 2 au1 2 s n1 n1 2  an1an1 an1 2  au1 2 s n2 n1 2  an1 2  it is obvious that n1 n21 1, and that both of the last two terms are positive. also, we have that as  an1 1 asw2v s w2 s   n1 2  n0 because the second order condition associated with the maximizing choice of s by type 1 citizens implies that a w2vs m1vw2s s n1hi  w2ws m1ww2s 2 n1 c20 c21 b0  finally, note that the payoff to a type 2 citizen in j 1 changes continuously at n ns,a ss simply increases from zero. thus,u 21 is increasing in n21, and so there cannot be any type 2 citizens in j 1.
this proves lemma 4c. 1116 i.j. horstmann et al. journal of public economics 91 1095 1118proof of proposition 5. first, we will show that n0nns. recall that, by the definition of nsand n0, 1,ns w m1 1t. further, a subsidy can always do better for the type 1 majority than any tax, t. if the tax raises g in revenue, then m1 1 nbm2 . so, it is always possible to set sso that 2 g , and set taxes at s g n, so the same level of zis provided, but consumption for a type 1 citizen is w s s nnw s n. thus, 1tb 1 for any n. since we also know that both 1 and 1t are increasing functions, it follows that n0nns.
we now prove that for any n1we have n2nn2s. fix n1and recall that if n2 n and n2s n , then we have that 2t 2t, and 2t 2, n1 1, 1 . so we will show that in fact that n nn . this follows from the three claims proved below.
claim 1. 2 bg1t for any n.
proof. ifs n0, then it must be that gs 2 satisfies  m1vgs s n  n c20 c21 w2vs n w2 s n  n  which implies that m1vgs 1 ns n w2 s n  w2v s n c20 c21   our elasticity assumption is that  1 s w2v s  w2 s n 1  which implies that w2 s  w2v s n1 s  so m1vgs 1 ns n w2 s n  w2v s n c20 c21 n1 ns n 1 s n m1vgt 1n c0 c1   and so m1 b0 implies gsbg1t. this proves claim 1.  claim 2. 2tn 2s, if 2 g 1t.
proof.
 t 2n x2sv n n2 gt 1n sv 1 n 1 sv n2 c20 c21 n0  since n2bnands b1. this proves claim 2. 1117 i.j. horstmann et al. journal of public economics 91 1095 1118claim 3. for any n 1, 2tn 2, n 1 1, 1 .
proof. lets be such that 2 g1tn 2 , with the last inequality following from claim 1. then 2 n0 implies s ns . then we have that 2tn 2 by claim 2. and 2 n 2, n1 1, 1 because 2 sn0. this proves claim 3, and proposition 5 then follows.  references