article economy and space spatial and temporal patterns of economic segregation in sweden s metropolitanareas a mobility approach john osth uppsala university, sweden ian shuttleworth queen s university, uk thomas niedomysl lund university, sweden abstract the statistical resources at hand for segregation research are usually almost exclusively confined to annual or decennial records where the only available spatial information is the individual s place of residence. this coarse temporal periodicity and spatial resolution provides a very limitedaccount of people s diurnal lives. incorporating mobility and temporal dimensions in segregation analysis is advocated within a growing body of research but there has rarely been sufficient data to make this possible. in this paper, we employ a fine grained mobile phone dataset outliningthe daily mobility of a substantial sample of the residents in sweden s metropolitan areas.
combining spatial trajectory data with detailed socio economic residential statistics, we are able to study how everyday spatial mobility in cities shapes the segregation experiencesof people and changes the segregation levels of places. results indicate that while mobility alleviates segregation for some individuals, the population of a large number of areas remain highly segregated even when daily mobility is taken into account. individuals residing or spendingtime in central urban areas are more exposed to individuals from other areas because of daily moves to these central places. daytime movement to central areas also reduces segregation significantly for people from places remote from city centres but with high average levelsof mobility whilst daytime segregation levels remain close to their original night time levels in low mobility areas in the outskirts of the cities.
corresponding author  john osth, department of social and economic geography, uppsala university, po box 513, uppsala 751 20, sweden.
email john.osth kultgeog.uu.seenvironment and planning a  economy and space 0 1 16  the author 2018 reprints and permissions  sagepub.co.uk journalspermissions.nav doi 10.1177 0308518x18763167 journals.sagepub.com home epn keywords segregation, mobility, mobile phones, time geography, big data, co presence introduction the lion s share of segregation research has traditionally focused on the area of residence.
however, a growing body of literature argues that segregation needs to be treated as aprocess occurring also outside the location of one s home, the argument being that individual experiences of segregation are not only a result of the conditions of the home neighbourhood, but also daily mobility in and through other places . this literature acknowledges thatareas outside the residential neighbourhood may have a signi cant role in determiningexperiences of segregation, and accordingly, individuals residing in the same area may beexposed to very different social and economic contexts depending on the nature of theirdaily mobility. for example, if segregation is strongly pronounced at the residential levelwhile other domains of daily life are characterised by greater diversity, daily mobility may facilitate encounters and interactions between members of groups unlikely to take place if a person was spatially restricted to their residential neighbourhood.
since data on daily spatial trajectories are rarely available in the censuses and administrative data sources most commonly used for research, the majority of studies offer limited insights on the impacts of daily mobility. however, the growing availability of large scale mobility data from a variety of digital sources including personal communication devices,social media and location based services is greatly improving the prospects for mobility oriented research . these kinds of data open up newresearch directions that were not possible before. due to the low collection costs andtheir wide population coverage, these new kinds of data sources have been employed in anumber of recent papers .
in this paper, we make use of data from mobile phones to address how daily mobility impacts upon residential segregation by income level in sweden s metropolitan areas.employing a time geographical framework, where the mobility of phones duringthe course of a regular working day is tracked, we study the degree of co presence between individuals residing in areas with different shares of residents in wealth and poverty. since these data are void of any information on the users, we make use of each phone s estimatedhome neighbourhood to assign it aggregated statistics from the place database depictingthe proportion of rich and poor individuals in the neighbourhood de ned following anaccepted eu de nition.
1 this approach allows us to compare to what extent patterns of residential segregation across cities translate into actual physical separation in time and space and to what extentindividuals from rich and poor places mix as part of their daily routine as contrasted withtheir night time residential location. the focus on economic segregation is for two reasons.first, economic segregation is easy to compare between locations and over time making itpreferable for use in a between metropolitan area comparative framework because of theavailability of consistent data. second, economic segregation has increased signi cantly in the nordic countries over time making it an interesting eld of study for both academic and political reasons .2 environment and planning a economy and space 0while the goal of this paper is to investigate if daily mobility can reduce the spatial separation which originates from segregated residential patterns, it needs to be emphasisedthat we do not suggest that increased levels of spatial proximity would necessarily reduce orabolish the negative and discriminatory practices commonly associated with residentialsegregation. neither does our analysis allow us to say anything about the actual natureof co presence, since we are only able to de ne co presence as a binary condition. we cannottell if co presence is necessarily of a meaningful nature or if it is negative weonly have information on whether phones were in close proximity. however, it is wellknown that segregation in its most extreme state ultimately leads to the complete spatialseparation of people and groups and that a prerequisite for greater integration is thatmembers of different groups, in at least some areas of daily life, share the same spaces. it is therefore of interest to study to what extent this is happeningoutside the residential neighbourhood in swedish cities where segregation by place ofresidence is strongly pronounced.
segregation across multiple spatial domains a substantial amount of research has dealt with the question of to what extent being co present with others in the same space matters for experiences of segregation. according toamin , sharing the same space and visually encountering others is on its own rarelysuf cient for meaningful interactions to take place however, these are likely to occur in micropublics , public spaces where individuals break out of their own realms to interactwith others. nevertheless, while such interactions may initially appear as trivial, they can beimportant for facilitating the understanding of other people s lives . a similarview is put forward by valentine , building on research undertaken in asocio economically diverse neighbourhood in london where ndings from interviews withresidents indicated that spatial proximity did not by default translate into lower levels ofprejudice.
while the relative importance of co presence for any individual is dif cult to measure due to variations in, for instance, the urban landscape, climate and individual preferences, thesevariations remain equally important also if we assume that individuals are stationary at theresidential location. this means that co presence through mobility is unlikely to introduce error terms that are not already present when conducting a traditional residential level analysis of segregation. if we assume that certain groups of residents living in thesame city rarely or never encounter one another, negative consequences may ensue as theprospects for understanding others are reduced. a number of studies have pointed to howsuch extreme forms of social seclusion are becoming more frequent in many urban settings,for example illustrated by the upper and upper middle classes never encountering peopleliving lives different from their own during almost any of their daily activities .
the underlying theoretical basis for research on segregation outside the residential context is that if a person is exposed to a different level of segregation in other contextswhere they spend time, this might have an impact on their personal experiences of segrega tion.studies addressing segregation in schools all indicate that ethnical segregation is more accentuated in schoolscompared to residential neighbourhoods. the swedish study alsoindicate that school segregation tends to increase over time. studies on workplace relatedsegregation suggest the opposite relationship between work and home. ellis et al. found that for male mexican immigrants and native born whites in los angeles, segregation osth et al. 3at the workplace was lower than in the area of residence, whereas this was not true for women due to gender differences in labour market participation.a slund and skans  found that workplace segregation is lower than corresponding residential segregation.
str omgren et al. found similar results as well as results that suggest that intermarriages between natives and immigrants lower workplace segregation signi cantly for men but not for women. blumen and zamir found in a study of workplace segregation intel aviv that most residents were found to be spending their working hours in more mixed social environments compared to their residential neighbourhoods. apart from xed places such as home, school and workplace, several studies target a wide range of different activ ities that may lead to increasing or decreasing levels of segregation. karen lucas  study and summarisation of earlier research on transport and social exclusion suggests that a wide range of parameters ranging from planning, physical, economical factors, etc. affectsexclusion and segregation from mobility. other studies have shown that access to recreational and amenity rich surroundings or access to healthy food markets or to fast food restaurants reinforces segregation . social or cultural bonds within groups may lead to self segregating behaviour that depending on socio economic status and contexts may be positive. edin et al. showed that ethnic clustering increased employment rate among immigrants and osth found that mortality risks among immigrant groups dropped in areas of greater concentrations of peers.
another body of research is comprised of studies covering segregation across the whole range of daily life, focusing on the entire socio spatial trajectory rather than a speci c activity or area. quantitative studies of this kind generally involve a multitude of methodological and computational challenges and different methods and measurements have beenproposed . in a paper where travel diary data from residents in southeast florida were used, wong and shaw , for example, demonstrated how measures of exposure for different racial groups, following theindex proposed by lieberson , could be computed in order to illustrate the importance of daily travel patterns for interethnic contact.
along similar lines, farber et al. devised the social interaction potential metric for measuring the feasibility of contact and interaction between residents living in different parts of the same metropolitan region. experimenting with a variety of methods for studying mobility segregation using samples collected from gps trajectories, palmer found that in many cases even relatively small samples of individual trajectories could be suf cient for depicting segregation also in larger metropolitan areas.
in terms of scale, the most extensive empirical studies have been the ones addressing the segregation between the estonian majority and the russian speaking minority in estonia, employing data from mobile phones to study the degree of co presence between the two groups in urban spaces .
the ndings indicated that daily mobility decreases residential segregation depicted in census records based on place of residence, although there is considerable variation between different time frames as well as between different types of residential areas.
furthermore, an instructive nding from numerous studies is that there seems to be a strong correlation between the characteristics of the residential neighbourhood and the areas visited during daily and other reoccurring activities . in the study by krivo et al. on social isolation in the los angeles area, multi level analysis revealed that the use of urban space during out of home activities was strongly tied to the area of residence, indicating that most people spent theirtime in areas with characteristics akin to the home neighbourhood. similar results were4 environment and planning a economy and space 0obtained by wang et al. , who found that there were major differences between residents in beijing s af uent and non af uent neighbourhoods in terms of their time use and travel habits, with this also extending to which areas they regularly visited and spent their time in.
urban segregation in sweden apart from a few scienti c reports on segregation on workplaces and in schools the vast majority of swedish segregation literature is focused on residentialsegregation in larger metropolitan areas. central to the swedish segregation debate has been the identi cation of neighbourhoods on the edges of cities as concentrations of economic disadvantage, social stress and ethnic minorities . moreover, recent ndings suggest that segregation levels have increased over recent decades in the main metropolitan areas .
our study is therefore focused on segregation in the three largest metropolitan areas in sweden, stockholm , g oteborg and malm o .
materials and methods mobility and socio economic data for our analysis, we construct two datasets making use of two kinds of data, mobility data andsocio economic residential statistics .t h e mobility data are drawn from data provided by a major telecommunications company covering a 24 hour ordinary weekday in the early summer of 2014.2data are limited to one day because of the large volume of data observations , making it technically challenging to follow phones for more than 24 hours. tuesday was chosen since it represents atypical weekday and may as such function as a proxy for everyday mobility. almost 250 million events generated by approximately 1.2 million unique swedish phones are included , meaning that the datacover approximately 15 of the swedish population. the use of phones belonging to the company is geographically balanced in the studied areas, meaning that the shares of users are relatively similar throughout the study areas. since mobile phone penetration in swedenis among the highest in the world, mobile phone use is not restricted to certain demographic or social groups. the observed patterns of mobility can therefore be viewed as a representative sample of the mobility of swedes on this particular day.
3individual phones were tracked through an anonymised identi cation number which allowed the mobility of all phones to be followed but which, for privacy reasons, lacked all information related to theowner. the spatial resolution is de ned by the spatial extent of the phone mast catchment areas which serve the phones. mast catchment areas can crudely be de ned as the area being closest to a mobile phone mast. masts are more placed more densely in urban areas and this for two reasons increased demand for service due to population density requires more masts to provide the service and the physical complexity of the urban landscape with buildingsthat block connectivity requires denser placement.
the phone mobility data are network driven , meaning that the positions of phones are recorded as long as they remain switched on regardless of if the phone is actively used. while events are recorded in the case of phone to mast osth et al. 5communication, phones also report their position to the closest mast every 5 minutes when switched on, which means that we are able to follow the mobility of each phone using this temporal de nition regardless of whether they send receive texts or calls. especially during the night hours, some phones are silent . however, since all mast handovers are recorded, silent phones can be assumed to stay under the serviceof mast jat time tsince the last event for that phone was logged for the same mast . since silent phones are stationary unless turned off , the risk of associating phones to the wrong locations is likely relativelysmall. a phone that is in use for a full 24 hours is consequently assigned 288 5 minute time slots, whose records progressively are lled with the last known location.
since no information about the phone user is gathered, the location where each phone rests for the longest duration between 00 00 and 07 20 is assumed to be the probable location of home or temporary night rest, although it should be acknowledged that an unknown fraction of phones may be assigned to locations where they usually do not spend their nightrest . in the studied population, the coordinates at any time between 00 00 and 07 20 were identical to the designated home coordinates in 85 of the time. this means that the assigned home location was a locationof rest for most phones but that some phones were used by individuals who were active during night or came to rest at a late hour or left early in the morning. if we treat the studied 24 hour day as a snapshot in time we assume that the share of hotel dwellers, night timeworkers and the large majority of individuals that rest in their homes are no different from the distribution of people at any other time.
in larger urban areas, mast areas are relatively small because there are more masts to service a denser population, mast areas can consequently be described in terms of neighbourhoods. in rural and remote areas, the catchment areas of masts are bigger in size making it dif cult to describe areas in terms of neighbourhoods. hence we concentrateon the more densely populated urban areas of stockholm, g oteborg and malm o for practical reasons as well as for the other reasons outlined above. spatially the three areas each roughly cover 7500 km 2including all central to suburban areas as well as the sprawling  urban close rural areas beyond the city .
the delineation of study areas was made speci cally for this study with the sole purpose ofincluding as much of the urban areas as possible whilst making sure that the catchment areas are small enough to pick up mobility. most of the extents of the studied metropolitan areas are depicted in figure 1 . letters represent residential suburbs known to have strong concentrations of residential poverty stars represent city centre areas known to be more af uent. in the stockholm map, letter r represents risne, b represents botkyrka, h stands forhusby and rt represents rinkeby tensta. in g oteborg b represents biskopsg rden,  h stands for hammarkullen and g represents g rdsten. in malm o s represents s odra so elund and r represents roseng rd.
the number of phones connected to a telephone mast varies considerably at different times, not least because many of the less night active masts are associated with day activities such as work rather than residential activities. this means that describing the socio economic status for some night rest areas using traditional area based measures, where the characteristics of the local population become synonymous with the night rest population, is problematic if the number ofresidents is small. there are also problems associated with the ecological fallacy where the6 environment and planning a economy and space 0characteristics of an individual cannot be reliably inferred from their spatial neighbourhood.
there is no conclusive answer to these problems but their danger is minimised in this case bythe use of the place database geo referenced to 100 m and the use of equipop software toconstruct small bespoke neighbourhoods since small areas are more likely to be sociallyhomogenous than larger units given the scale of spatial variation of phenomena such aswealth and poverty see, for example lloyd .
in order to cater for these population variations and issues, the data depicting the socioeconomic characteristics in the neighbourhood surrounding each mast are therefore de nedusing a k nearest approach using the equipop software . using data drawn from the place database, a statistics sweden compiledresearch database located at uppsala university containing a longitudinal register describ ing demographics, socio economics and geography of all swedish residents characteristicsof observed residents from year 2010 are used to describe the average socio economiccharacteristics of the 800 nearest neighbours from the location of each mast. the countof 800 was chosen since it lay close to the median count of phones connected to each mast inthe three metropolitan regions.
4as socio economic characteristics, we look for the share of poor and wealthy individuals around each mast . the de nition of poverty and wealthfollows the, in eu, commonly used de nition of relative poverty and inverse for wealth.
methodological approach these approaches described below necessarily make a number of assumptions and it is wellto be explicit about these . by combining the different kinds of data describedabove, we can construct two datasets that can be compared in further analysis, a tg dataset and a home dataset. both datasets are designed to be equal to each other with the only difference being that one assumes that the population is stationary over a 24 hour period whilst the other assumes that the population is mobile according to the observedphone mobility patterns .
figure 1. the three metropolitan study areas. stockholm and the suburbs risne , botkyrka , rinkeby t ensta and husby g oteborg with suburbs biskopsg arden , hammarkullen and g ardsten malm o with suburbs s odra sofielund and roseng ard . stars represent central parts of each metropolitan area. osth et al. 7the tg dataset is constructed by assigning each phone initial socio economic characteristics derived from where the phone spent the longest time between 00 00 and 07 00 duringthe studied day , an approachwhich can be described as dipping the phone in the local socio economic context of its residential neighbourhood . it is assumed that the night rest location is that ofhome. all phones that are sharing night rest locations thus share the socio economic sta tuses, statuses they bring to each place they visit during the day. as phone holders moveduring the course of the day, the exposure to phones with different initial socio economicstatuses will cause each phone to pick up in uences from co present phone holders.
thus, mobility is conceptualised in a tg fashion where socio economic characteristics are shared between phones that are co present in a telephone mast area at the same time. as phone owners move around in space time where phoneusers with different characteristics are co present, the phone user is assumed to be exposedto other phone holders who may be more or less similar in terms of socio economic char acteristics. over a day, the different trajectories of the phone holders will lead to differentpatterns of socio economic exposure for different phone holders. it should be noted thatthe co presence areas cannot be seen as full representations of real life neighbourhoods sinceco presence only captures physical co presence in time and space, and that these assumedinteractions may be ranging in quality from actual meetings to sitting in twodifferent vehicles with no interaction. having that said, we assume that co presence oftenaccommodate similarities between peers that more or less explains modes of transport andmotivations for being in the location. over the course of the day, these similarities betweenpeers will be more common and more important for the formation of the full day statisticsthan erroneous encounters produced as a result of technical mast settings including beingassigned to different masts for service or bandwidth reasons. in addition, the size of the mastareas is generally small enough to depict the economic composition of most areas also incases where phones for technical reason hop between masts. this is because the density ofmasts is much ner than the spatial sorting of economic activity and socio economic groupswhich means that the observed phone trajectories can be assumed to be good enough forsegregation analysis but not for a detailed analysis of the path trajectory of each phone.
mobility time is partitioned into 5 minute slots meaning that the maximum exposure to other phone users a phone usercan experience is 24 hours 12 ve minute slots 288 ve minute units. however, sincephones may be turned off or located outside of the range of a mast, not all phones areexposed for the full 288 units period.
the computed exposure to wealth and to poverty for any phone user is a product of the average exposure at all times during the 24 hour window. in equations and ,the computations are formulated as follows poverty jt x jtnightrestpoverty i copresencecounts jt in equation , the place and time speci c poverty value is speci ed, where j represents mast area, t represents temporal unit and i represents the values attributable tothe individual phones. the computed value is shared among all co present phone users.nightrestpoverty irepresents the share of poor individuals surrounding the mast recognised8 environment and planning a economy and space 0as the night rest location. copresencecounts jtrepresents the number of co present phone holders at a speci c place at a speci c time povertytg i x ipoverty jt timeunitsobserved i in equation , poverty jtvalues are aggregated on an individual level, summarising the poverty exposure of each phone during the active time units of the 24 hour period.
the computed povertytg ivalue represents the average exposure to poverty experienced by the phone user and is the value that is used to compare tg values to home values. the variable timeunitsobserved irepresents the total number of 5 minute intervals recorded for each phone during the 24 hour window.
the home dataset is in all essential similar to the tg population with the exception that the population is assumed to be stationary throughout the day. this means that the values representing shares of poor and wealthy individuals are identical to the populations andvalues used to create the nightrestpoverty iandnightrestwealth ivariables, holding the share of poor and wealthy night rest individuals surrounding each mast.
methods for comparison to measure the impact of mobility on segregation, we employ a series of tests which fall intotwo categories global statistical measures and local statistical measures. the selected global measure looks at the variability of populations at the regional level of metropolitan areaswhilst the local measures consider local spatial patterns of exposure to wealth and poverty.
this means that the global measure can be used to communicate the overall effect whilst the local measure can be used to trace local deviations from general patterns and averages.
the gini index is employed as a global measure and can be used to look at the total exposure to wealth or poverty in each population and expresses how much of the exposure that deviatesfrom a utopian state where all phones have equal shares of exposure. the gini coef cient renders a value that is equal to zero if the utopian state is observed and one in case of complete inequality. by comparing gini coef cients between urban areas and datasets ,the unequal distribution of exposure of wealth and poverty can be compared.
for testing local patterns of deviation of exposure we make use of maps to depict the deviation between populations. for each mast area, we divide the local average tg value with the home value. by mapping the rendered values for all mast areas, the distribution of areas more or less affected by mobility can be shown.
results the paper s main question is whether spatial mobility reduces or increases segregation whencompared with a derived night time residential population. different methods are used to answer this question and in this section we present the results from these approaches in two main sections, the rst of which focuses on the global pattern by metropolitan area, the second of which considers variations within metropolitan areas.
global statistics our analysis begins in table 1 which presents simple descriptive statistics such as the mean, median, standard deviation and minimum and maximum values across the three osth et al. 9metropolitan areas for poverty and wealth. values representing the tg populations are presented as aggregated full day values . this meansthat both the tg and home populations contain equivalent number of phones . the means should be the same in both the tg and the non tg populations but only in the case of wealth in stockholm differences in the means can be observed. this is a direct result of somephones being turned off or out of reach at some times. the differences in standard deviation,maximum and minimum indicate that mobility tends to reduce overall differences between areas and phones by lowering deviations and reducing the range between minimum and maximum. this makes sense if we take into account that most mobility from a high povertyor high wealth area is likely directed towards areas with lower concentrations of both wealth and poverty, simply because these are much more numerous . in other words, the greater the rate of mobility, the greater the reduction in areal differencesbetween places. in line with what is known from previous research on residential segregation in the three metropolitan areas, poverty levels are most pronounced in the urban area of malm o but relatively similar in magnitude in g oteborg and stockholm. the effect of mobility also seems to be relatively similar in all three regions.
a well known method for the estimation of the distribution of inequality is the use of gini statistics. traditionally gini coef cients express the deviation between an equal distribution of wealth and an observed distribution of wealth. here, the perfect distribution isrepresented by an equal distribution of exposure to wealth and poverty and the so called lorenz curves represent the observed distributions of exposure to wealth and poverty. as in traditional gini indices, greater values indicate greater inequalities. the gini coef cients intable 2 indicate that mobility reduces the inequality for both wealth and poverty.thetable 1. descriptive statistics for the concentration of poor and wealthy individuals in each metropolitan region before and after daily mobility.
mean median sd min max poverty stockholm home 0.13 0.11 0.08 0.01 0.70tg 0.13 0.12 0.05 0.03 0.64 g oteborg home 0.13 0.12 0.07 0.03 0.51tg 0.13 0.12 0.05 0.05 0.40 malm o home 0.19 0.17 0.09 0.04 0.59 tg 0.19 0.18 0.07 0.06 0.45 wealth stockholm home 0.30 0.29 0.11 0.03 0.60tg 0.29 0.29 0.08 0.05 0.54 g oteborg home 0.26 0.26 0.09 0.01 0.52tg 0.26 0.26 0.06 0.05 0.43 malm o home 0.22 0.23 0.09 0.00 0.47tg 0.22 0.23 0.06 0.02 0.43 tg time geographical.10 environment and planning a economy and space 0reduction is around 1 3 for all areas in terms of wealth but with regard to poverty the reduction is smaller and varies more between regions, with the least reduction in the malm o area. these patterns con rm those revealed in table 1.
local statistics the global statistics shows that mobility clearly helps to reduce the differences in exposure to both wealth and poverty throughout the metropolitan areas. the global statistics cannot, however, tell us about the changes in exposure locally. in order to tell what type of areas that are affected differently, we map how exposure to wealthy and poor peers change as mobility is taken into account.
in figure 2, the exposure to poverty and wealth is illustrated side by side for stockholm . the maps are constructed to enhance statistics rather than the underlying landscape, which makes the identi cation of particular areas in each metropolitan area dif cult.
the top row of maps shows the spatial distribution of poverty and wealth for the home population . red colours indicate strong concentrations while blue colours indicate the opposite. map colouration is based on1 2standard deviations for all three metropolitan areas which mean that the mapped results can be compared between maps. the bottom row of maps shows the ratio of tg over hometg home c0 c1 . in locations where the tg value is greater than that of home, the ratio is greater than 1. in cases where the tg value is smaller than 1, the ratioholds values below 1. also here does the colouration express frac12 standard deviations of the ration distribution of the entire studied population however, the colours are different.
blue colours indicate that the ratio is greater than 1 which means that mobility has strengthened the exposure of the studied group . brown colours, on the other hand, indicate that mobility has weekend the exposure.
the top row maps indicate a concentration of wealth in the more central parts of the city and to coastal areas , while poverty tends to be more concentrated in speci c locations, especially in suburbs that were built during the 1960 as multi oor buildings to meet the need for housing from rural areas and international workmigration . the bottom row of maps depicts a more fragmented pattern compared to the top row maps . this is expected since the poorest and wealthiest areas can only become less concentrated because of basement and ceiling effects due to mobility which mean that their spatial patterns will be more fragmented . having said that, there are relativelytable 2. gini coefficients before and after daily mobility.
home tg wealth stockholm 0.21 0.14g oteborg 0.18 0.12 malm o 0.23 0.15 poverty stockholm 0.28 0.19g oteborg 0.26 0.18 malm o 0.26 0.19 tg time geographical. osth et al. 11many areas in close proximity to the poor neighbourhoods that become dark blue in the poverty map, i.e. already poor areas are becoming poorer due to the in ow of people from poor areas. the reasons for this pattern may be many but is likely to include mobility to suburban centres where schools and retail are located. the bottom row  wealth map indicates that wealth tends to concentrate in the central areas of the city.
this may be attributable to the spatial distribution of jobs where higher wage jobs tend to be more clustered to the central parts of the urban area in swedish cities .
conclusions employing a unique dataset describing the ow of mobile phone users in the three major metropolitan regions in sweden during a 24 hour period in the early summer of 2014, this study aimed to address whether observed patterns of economic segregation at the residential level in swedish metropolitan areas remain intact when controlling for daily mobility.
using two datasets contrasting stationary and mobile populations, the overall results con rm that mobility appears to reduce segregation. the results also indicate that the effect of mobility is more profound for exposure to wealth and less so for poverty, especially in malm o.
the underlying reason for the regional disparities in the effect of mobility for segregation is not analysed in this study, but it is likely that urban planning, including accessibility to jobs and service, residential planning and infrastructure may play important roles.
the areas where mobility has the greatest impact appear to be the central parts of each metropolitan areas where residents to a greater extent than others are exposed to visitors figure 2. t op row show maps over the distribution of residential poverty and wealth  where strong concentrations are depicted red and the opposite blue. lower row shows tg overhome calculations for poverty and wealth where blue values indicate concentration effects due to mobility and brown indicates a reduction due to mobility.12 environment and planning a economy and space 0from areas with opposite economic structures, normalising segregation towards the regional averages. in suburban areas with strong concentrations of either poverty or wealth and lowshares of external visitors, the results indicate that segregation still decreases when mobility comes into play. this is likely largely a result of the physical and economical urban structures where the locations of urban opportunities are strongly concentrated to the inner city.consequently, residents from equally poor and wealthy areas converge in the inner city to such a magnitude that the extreme patterns of segregation present at the residential level are being reduced.
whereas levels of daily segregation in many neighbourhoods appear to decrease due to mobility, it is dif cult to measure to what extent increased levels of co presence have a directimpact on individual experiences of segregation, and it remains a question which should befurther examined using other methods. however, the observed effect of mobility do say something about how patterns of residential segregation correspond to the daily sociospatial trajectory in other words, that the residential neighbourhood cannot be regardedas the single determinant for economic segregation.
ethics the use of our mobile phone data in research has been approved by a regional ethics board in sweden .
acknowledgements we wish to thank three anonymous reviewers and editor for their help to improve the manuscript.
declaration of conflicting interests the author declared no potential con icts of interest with respect to the research, authorship, and or publication of this article.
funding the author received no nancial support for the research, authorship, and or publication of thisarticle.
notes 1. relative poverty is de ned as having 60 of the median national income or less. relative wealth is de ned as having 140 of the median income or more.
2. the data are stored in the mind database at uppsala university.3. according to world bank statistics, there were 128 mobile cellular subscriptions per 100 people in 2014 in sweden.
4. due to agreement between the telephone service company and the research team, the exact count of phones and masts may not be revealed.
orcid id john osth http orcid.org 0000 0002 4536 9229 references