income segregation s impact on local public expenditures evidence from municipalities and school districts, 1980 2010 ryan m. gallagher northeastern illinois university, usa article info jel classi cation  r5 r2 h7 keywords  income segregation income inequality local public nance school district nance government sizeabstract residential income segregation within local political jurisdictions has risen considerably since 1980 in the u.s.
despite this trend, and a growing body of research on wealth inequality and its impact on public sector size, income segregation s own in uence over local public choice has not been thoroughly investigated. using blockgroup income distributions for the years 1980, 1990, 2000, and 2010 income segregation is measured for indi vidual u.s. municipalities and school districts, where the spatial distribution of income may carry the most political relevance. estimates indicate that rising income segregation reduced per capita spending growth considerably for both municipalities and school districts. these ndings are robust to various model speci cations and to the use of instrumental variables that adjust for the potential endogeneity of local income segregation. this evidence is consistent with the view that intra jurisdictional income segregation undermines trust between community members and complicates collective action. however, a spatial income inequality continues to bepositively correlated with local public sector size, as suggested by recent empirical research.
1. introduction local governments in the united states provide a broad set of services that their constituents rely on to conduct many of their day to day routines. these include services consumed by nearly every member in a community, such as local streets and public safety, as well as those that are directly enjoyed by only a small subset, such as public education.
although documented evidence points to a gradual convergence in the level of services provided across local jurisdictions , considerable variation persists, the causes of which have been the subject of much academic inquiry since tiebout s path breaking work on the subject .theoretical work on this topic points to intra jurisdictional heterogeneity, such as income inequality or ethnic fragmentation, as a partial determinant of communities willingness to support public sector expenditures, particularly towards redistributive programs. however, this research yields varied conclusions with respect to how such heterogeneity can be expected to impact local public expenditures.1a growing body of empirical research has also begun to address the impact of economic inequality on local government size, particularly with respect to human capital enhancing expenditures. like the theoretical work that preceded it, the ndings are varied. during the rst half of the twentieth century, when there was considerable variation in how communities  nanced public schools within the u.s., research generally suggests that e mail address r gallagher1 neiu.edu .
1notably, some formal models suggest that rising income inequality may hinder government spending if members of unequal societies are less likely to a gree on spending priorities or have diminished collective in uence over their political representatives .
conversely, meltzer richard , alesina and rodrik , and persson and tabellini have used traditional median voter frameworks to argue that rising income inequality incentivizes a more expansive government, as the decisive median voter s tax price declines with rising income inequality . although, each of these models originated out a desire to explain macro level patterns, their frameworks have since been used to rationalize local public spending as w ell. beginning with alesina et al. , a complementary eld of study now addresses the role of ethnic and racial heterogeneity on public sector spending. this literature argues that heterogeneity along racial or ethnic lines results in fewer resources being devoted towards the public sector, largely due to increased politic al disagreement over spending priorities, concerns regarding inter group redistribution, and a general distrust between groups. see alesina and la ferrara ,lind , and beach and jones for more recent work on this subject and alesina and la ferrara for a broader review of this literature. a separate but related area of research identi es intergenerational con ict as a factor impacting local spending decisions .
contents lists available at sciencedirect regional science and urban economics journal homepage www.elsevier.com locate regec https doi.org 10.1016 j.regsciurbeco.2021.103710 received 12 march 2020 received in revised form 11 june 2021 accepted 13 june 2021 available online 22 june 20210166 0462 2021 elsevier b.v. all rights reserved.regional science and urban economics 90 103710local support for public education was strongest within racially homogenous communities that exhibited low levels of wealth inequality.2 conversely, studies focused on the latter half of the twentieth century,such as corcoran and evans andboustan et al. , nd that income inequality actually promotes the expansion of local government, both for education and non educational public services.
notably absent from much of this research are in depth considerations for another form of community income heterogeneity that has risen over time and varies considerably across local political jurisdictions in the u.s. residential income segregation. to date, most empirical research on the subject of income segregation emphasizes its link with income inequality, as well as its long run trends within metropolitan areas.
3income segregation s role within political jurisdictions with taxing and spending authority has received very little attention however, its impact is potentially quite large. the question of income segregation s effect on public sector outcomes is especially interesting in light of evidence presented here that temporal changes in income inequality and income segregation within jurisdictions are not that highly correlated.4 this raises the possibility that income segregation has its own effect onpublic sector outcomes that is independent of a spatial income inequality.
the current paper addresses this gap in the literature by investigating income segregation s impact on public spending within local political jurisdictions. exploiting block group level variation in the household income distribution from 1980 to 2010 this study documents changes in income segregation within two important forms of local government inthe u.s. incorporated municipalities and independent uni ed school districts.
5using two separate measures, household income segregation is shown to have risen rapidly over the 1980 2010 period with the average sampled municipality and school district experiencing a 43 percent and 35 percent increase over the 30 year timeframe, respectively.
jurisdiction level measures of income segregation are next combined with detailed municipal and school district nance data in order to assess the causal impact of income segregation on local public spending. in addition to using standard panel data estimation techniques to control for jurisdiction level time invariant xed effects and idiosyncratic growth trends, instrumental variables control for any remaining bias that may result from endogenous sorting of households across space. instruments for income segregation are constructed by freezing each jurisdiction s spatial distribution of family income to what is was in 1970 and then allowing each family s income to grow in accordance with nationwide trends, with separate growth rates applied to families falling along different positions of the 1970 national income distribution. temporalvariation in any instrument constructed from these simulated spatial income distributions is therefore independent of any post 1970 sorting behavior. identifying variation is instead driven by changes in the nationwide income distribution interacted with the lagged 1970 spatial distribution of family incomes, both of which are presumed to be exogenous to post 1970 changes in local public spending. tests for robustness suggest that this is a reasonable assumption.
the ndings presented below indicate that income segregation within local jurisdictions has a sizeable negative impact on spending for core local public services. rising income segregation between 1980 and 2010 is estimated to have reduced growth in municipal and school district percapita spending by about 12 percent and 11 percent, respectively. within municipalities, these spending reductions are distributed across a broad variety of services, such as transportation and recreation. on the revenue side, these effects appear to be driven primarily by reduced support for property taxation intergovernmental aid received from outside sources also declines with incomes segregation for municipalities.
income segregation s observed impact on local public sector outcomes has multiple potential explanations. here, research into racial ethnic segregation effect on public sector activity is quite suggestive. alesina, baqir and easterly argue that segregation affects spending by facilitating distrust between a community s members and exacerbating the adverse effects of ethnic fragmentation .6beach and jones corroborate this point, reporting that the negative effects of racial fragmentation on public sector spending are magni ed within highly segregated communities here they speculate that concerns over spatial redistribution may underlie this interaction, with policy makers being less supportive of public expenditures that they believe will ow to only certain racial or ethnic groups residing in segregated neighborhoods. similarly, trounstine argues that segregation may exacerbate a municipality s race based political divisions by reducing the occurrences of regular interactions across racial groups which, otherwise, would help to mitigate feelings of racial intolerance and resentment. heightened racial divisions along these lines may hinder cooperation and the potential for productive collective action within the jurisdiction s political system, a consequence of which may be reduced levels of locally nanced public spending. indeed, trounstine  nds evidence that racial segregation within municipalities correlates with reduced levels of public expenditure. lastly, a related body of research suggests that racial ethnic segregation reduces minorities political strength at the local level, thus making it easier for politicians to deny local public services to segregated minorities .7 many of the mechanisms through which racial ethnic segregation is believed to impact local public spending may be applicable to income segregation as well. for example, trust in and sympathy for one s fellow citizens may very well degrade with reduced exposure to households of a different income class. concerns about spatial redistribution may also be particularly prevalent within jurisdictions that tax income and wealth to  nance operations. however, income segregation likely in uences spending through direct scal channels that are less relevant to other forms of segregation. not only is income a critical determinant of one s willingness to pay for local public spending regardless of one s race or ethnicity but, as a proxy for wealth, income is a major component of the2see galor, moav and vollrath ,goldin ,goldin and katz  , and ramcharan .
3see jargowsky ,wheeler and la jeunesse ,yang and jargowsky ,watson , and reardon and bischoff .
4the degree to which income segregation correlates with income inequality is, of course, sensitive to how these respective concepts are measured. reardon and bischoff use a rank order index and a gini coef cient to measure income segregation and income inequality, respectively. they nd that a 1 standard deviation increase in a metropolitan area s income inequality is asso ciated with a 0.25 standard deviation increase in that area s level of income segregation . the current study uses alternative measures of income inequality and income segregation that are believed to more consistent withmodels of local political economy. i discuss these measures in greater detail later in the paper. here, the correlation between decade over decade changes in income segregation and income inequality within a municipality and school dis trict is observed to be 0.21 and 0.24, respectively. see fig. b1 in the appendix for additional statistics.
5taken together, municipalities and uni ed school districts accounted for approximately 65 percent of the nation s local public spending in 2012. this gure accounts for all governmental units across the united states classi ed as municipalities, townships, or school districts in the 2012 census of governments. source 2012 census of governments finance. author s calculations.6alesina and zhuravskaya link increased levels of ethnic and linguistic segregation to poorer quality public institutions, arguing that reduced levels of trust between groups in more segregated nations ultimately undermines gov ernment quality.
7another paper, by la ferrara and mele , addresses the impact that racial segregation has on local public school spending but does notobserve segregation within political jurisdictions with taxing or spending authority . rather, they are concerned with studying how segregation across neighborhoods within a metropolitan area in uences school district spending.r.m. gallagher regional science and urban economics 90 103710 2local tax base and an individual s tax burden. the degree to which income is spatially concentrated within a jurisdiction may therefore in uence the formation of coalitions responsive to individuals income based preferences in ways that racial ethnic segregation cannot. local jurisdictions whose residents elect neighborhood representatives to lobby vote on their behalf on jurisdiction wide spending programs may be particularly responsive to income segregation, especially if each representative votes in alignment with their respective neighborhood s median income voter.8 if, for example, one s income in uences their taste for certain types of local public spending, a simple extension of the public choice model developed by alesina et al. suggests that rising income segregation may aggravate disagreements between neighborhood representatives regarding what types of jurisdiction wide investments should be made.9 disagreements along these lines are likely to yield reductions in local public spending levels . alternatively, because income is the base upon which local taxes are raised, the distribution of income across space in uences the tax price paid by the decisive neighborhood s median voter, with tax prices for a local public good rising continuously with one s own income, all else being equal. if income segregation pushes the lowest income residents into a minority of neighborhoods jurisdiction wide spending outcomes would likely re ect the higher tax prices paid by the wealthier median voters residing in the majority of neighborhoods .
note that each of these examples require us to account for how much wealthier poorer one neighborhood s residents are when compared toanother s when measuring the magnitude in which a jurisdiction s wealth is spatially concentrated. unlike race ethnicity, which are unordered categorical variables, the mechanisms through which income segregation impacts spending will likely be responsive to income s inherent continuity.
10 in addition to its relevance for the literature citied above, this study also contributes to the body of research investigating the long term economic effects of residential segregation on disadvantaged groups, particularity children. works by cutler and glaeser ,card and rothstein , and ananat all point to racial segregation as having a disproportionately adverse impact on the outcomes of black youth. similarly, chetty et al. nd that low income children who are raised in more income and or racially segregated areas are, on average, less upwardly mobile than their less segregated counterparts.
while some of the channels through which segregation likely impacts individuals have been identi ed, such as adverse neighborhood peer effects and reduced access to work opportunities , the ndings in this study indicate that many of the public services that lower income groups may disproportionally rely on, such as public education and public recreation facilities, are also less likely to receive robust funding in more income segregated communities.
in what follows, section 2discusses the measures of income segregation used throughout this analysis and reviews data. section 3outlines the main empirical design and discusses the approach for addressing estimation bias resulting from any endogeneity of income segregation.
section 4presents the main empirical results and robustness checks. the  ndings point overwhelmingly to income segregation having a largenegative impact on core local public services. these ndings are robust to the use of instrumental variables and alternative speci cations. section 5 concludes and provides direction for future research.
2. data2.1. measuring income segregation throughout this paper, residential income segregation within a jurisdiction is measured using block group level variation in household population and income, as tabulated by the u.s. census bureau.
11building off of the discussion above, it is important that any measure of income segregation used in this study be sensitive to the absolute magnitude of spatial income differentials when gauging the geographic concentration of wealth within a jurisdiction the relative size of these income differences is believed to affect the degree to which there is variation across space in the tastes for local public services. income s inherent continuity must therefore be accounted for when measuring heterogeneity in the spatial distribution of household incomes. this requirement precludes the use of segregation indexes that ignore the magnitude of spatial income differentials, such as multi group measures of income segregation that assign households into arbitrary and unordered categorical groups. similarly, indexes that are insensitive to rank preserving changes in the spatial income distribution, such as those proposed by reardon and reardon and bischoff  are also inappropriate in this context.12 two measures of income segregation are used in this study, both of which fully account for the continuity of income. the primary index of income segregation is a gini coef cient that quanti es the concentration of a jurisdiction s household income within its richest block groups.
summing across a jurisdiction s block groups after sorting them from poorest to richest , the gini simply records how the cumulative share of total household income grows with the cumulative share of total households, with higher values indicating higher levels of income segregation.13panels a and b of fig. 1 convey 8of course, neighborhoods act collectively in any number of ways, such as being part of an of cial political sub jurisdiction , or forming local chambers of commerce community organizations, etc.
9that is, neighborhoods whose median income voter experiences growth in relative wealth will be increasingly at odds with neighborhoods whose medianvoter experiences at or declining relative wealth. for instance, one s income may be particularly important for determining support for public spending, regardless of race ethnicity, when private alternatives exist .
10this suggests that belonging to an income group matters only to the degree that it implies being a certain degree more less wealthier than other groups.11the term block group is used out of convenience. as late as 1980, small area statistics for some tracted regions were tabulated using enumeration districts instead of block groups. in these instances, the enumeration district istreated as being equivalent to a block group. within these census designated small areas, households are tabulated across as few as 16 income bins to as many as 25 bins . all forms of household income measuredby the u.s. census bureau are included in these tabulations.block group tabulations from the 1980 2000 decennial censuses are located in that census stf3 summary les. block group tabulations centered around 2010 come from the 2008 12 5yr. american community survey . all block group tabulations, with the exception of those from the 1980 decennial census, are distributed by the minnesota population center . small area tabulations from the 1980 decennial census are downloaded directly from the u.s. censusbureau s ftp website . please see of cial u.s.
census bureau documentation for additional details concerning sampling techniques and de nitions.
12multi group measures of segregation are perhaps most appropriate when measuring segregation across clearly de ned and unordered groups, such as racial or ethnic classes. see reardon and firebaugh .
13seeappendix c for a discussion of how block groups are mapped to jurisdiction boundaries. in order to construct the gini coef cient, tabulated households are rst assigned an income level corresponding to the median household income for their particular income bin and year, as calculated from a nationwidesample of ipums microdata . from here, a block group s aggregate household income is computed. the gini for the ith jurisdiction is calculated as gini i 1 c0pn j 1 ij c01 ij hj c0hj c01 , where hj and ijmeasures the cumulative share of a jurisdiction s households and household income in the jth ranked block group , respectively, such that h0 i0 0 and hn in 1.
notice that replacing block groups with households in this equation returns a traditional a spatial gini coef cient for the jurisdiction, such as that used by boustan et al. .r.m. gallagher regional science and urban economics 90 103710 3this concept visually with lorenz curves for municipalities that experienced some of the greatest absolute changes in household income segregation between 1980 and 2010.
following rhode and strumpf ,shorrocks and wan , and novotny the between component of theil s t index for income inequality serves as an alternative measure of income segrega tion. this index captures the portion of income inequality within a jurisdiction attributable to the average dispersion of incomes between block groups and is distinct from the average dispersion of incomes within block groups.
14as is shown in fig. 2 , within jurisdiction decadal changes of these two measures of income segregation, the gini and the theil, track one another quite closely. because of this, empirical estimates involving the theil index are largely relegated to a supplemental appendix in order to conserve space.
descriptive statistics of each income segregation index are presented intable 1 below. both indexes reveal a pattern of rapidly rising income segregation over the 1980 2010 timeframe within both municipalities and school districts. additional patterns not shown here are also worth noting. over 85 of municipalities and 92 of school districts experienced rising income segregation over the 1980 2010 period, regardless of the income segregation measure used. using the gini coef cient, income segregation rose by 43 for the average municipality and 35 for the average school district. these patterns are similar for the theil index.rising income segregation over this period contrasts with contemporaneous declines in racial segregation, as documented by cutler et al.
 and glaeser and vigdor . indeed, within jurisdiction decadal changes in income segregation are generally uncorrelated with changes in racial segregation. this pattern is consistent with the observation that income segregation is a poor predictor of racial segregation. a more positive relationship between changes in income segregation and changes in income inequality is observed , which supports the view the rising income inequality is a partial driver of rising income segregation . however, these correlations are generally quite small.
15 2.2. baseline samples the baseline samples in table 1 track individual cities towns and school districts across each of the four census years from 1980 to 2010.
municipalities are limited to those with at least ve full census block groups in each of the four census years, a 1970 population of at least 5,000, at least three block groups in 1970, and whose land area grew or shrank by no more than 10 percent between 1980 and 2010.16because income segregation is measured using block group variation, the number fig. 1. lorenz curves of household income segregation, 1980 2010. lorenz curves are calculated using block group level household counts and household incomes as described in the text. with the exception of the origin points, the x symbol on each gure marks the location of an individual block group within the municipality.
14the between component for the ith jurisdiction is calculated as theil i  p jsij c18 yij yi c19 ln c18 yij yi c19 , where sijis i s share of households residing in the jth block group and terms yiand yijmeasure average household income in jurisdiction i and block group j, respectively. see jargowsky ,yang and jargowsky  , and wheeler and la jeunesse for similar measures.15seefig. b1 in the appendix for these correlations and others.
16the requirement of at least three 1970 block groups guarantees that an instrumental variable can be constructed for that observation .
the land area restriction is designed to facilitate more meaningful longitudinalcomparisons, as some municipalities grew their boundaries considerably duringthis time period. this particular restriction reduces the sample s size considerably and is both relaxed and tightened later on in the analysis. similar restrictions are placed on the school district sample as well.r.m. gallagher regional science and urban economics 90 103710 4of useful municipalities observed consistently over the 1980 2010 period is somewhat limited, as the u.s. was not fully blocked until 1990. the baseline sample, which is balanced, contains 1310 individual municipalities for the each of four census years for a total of 5240 unique observations. the baseline sample of school district is also balanced and covers the same 1980 2010 period. districts are limited to those that are independent and uni ed , contain at least ve block groups in each of the four years, have a 1970 enrollment of at least 100 students, contained at least three 1970 block groups, and whose observed landarea grew or shrank by no more than 25 percent between 1980 and 2010.17as with municipalities, these restrictions are modi ed later on in the paper. altogether, the school district sample tracks 402 independent fig. 2. within jurisdiction changes in alternative measures of income segregation, 1980 2010. decadal changes in the gini and theil indexes are measured along the x axis and y axis, respectively. for comparability, theses indexes are standardized to have a mean 0 and standard deviations of 1. these standard izations are not used anywhere else in the study. please see the text for further discussion.
table 1 summary statistics for selected variables.
mean std. dev. min max mean std. dev. min max panel a municipalities panel b school districts  1980 levelsgini 0.10 0.04 0.02 0.27 0.13 0.04 0.04 0.27 theil 0.02 0.02 0.00 0.12 0.03 0.02 0.00 0.12mean to median income 1.12 0.08 0.87 1.63 1.13 0.09 0.98 1.45exp. per capita 0.58 0.30 0.09 2.89 6.48 1.80 3.44 15.13changes   gini 0.03 0.03 c00.14 0.21 0.04 0.03 c00.07 0.15  theil 0.01 0.02 c00.07 0.13 0.02 0.02 c00.03 0.09  mean to median income 0.11 0.12 c00.47 0.60 0.13 0.10 c00.30 0.47  exp. per capita 0.47 0.32 c00.63 2.39 5.57 2.81 0.35 20.95 all samples constitute balanced panels. the municipality sample tracks 1310 individual cities towns over four time periods . municipalities are limited to those fully containing at least ve block groups for each of the years 1980 2010, a 1970 population of at least 5,000, having at least three block groups in 1970, and whose land area increased or declined by no more than 10 percent between 1980 and 2010. municipal expenditures exclude education spending. the school district sample tracks 402 individual uni ed school districts over four time periods . independent uni ed school districts are limited to those fully containing at least  ve block groups for each of the years 1980 2010, having at least 100 students enrolled in 1970, having at least three block groups in 1970, and whose estimated land area increased or declined by no more than 25 percent between 1980 and 2010. the term per capita means per person for municipalities and per student for school districts. all dollar values are reported in terms of 2010 dollars. please see text for further details.
17the land area restriction for school districts is purposefully weaker than that for municipalities in order to allow for a largeenough baseline sample. school district boundaries changed considerably overthe 1980 2010 period and imposing a 10 percent land area restriction would have returned a very small baseline sample. see appendix c for a discussion of the method used to calculate municipality and school district land areas.r.m. gallagher regional science and urban economics 90 103710 5uni ed districts over four periods of time, for a total of 1608 unique observations.
financial statistics for incorporated cities, towns, and independent uni ed school districts come from digitized census of governments  data for each of the years ending in 2 from 1982 to 2012 . for school districts, which provide a narrower range of services than cities and towns do, the nancial statistics of primary interest are total current expenditures and intergovernmental aid received, both measured in per student terms. for cities and towns, which provide a broader range of services, data on current per person expenditures, both in the aggregate and for particular uses are collected, as is information on non education intergovernmental aid received.
socio economic variables are taken from a variety of sources.18 an area s level of a spatial income inequality is measured using its mean to median income ratio. this metric carries the advantage of being grounded in standard models of public choice. notably, under conditions where income or wealth is taxed this ratio can be interpreted as the inverse of the tax price faced by the decisive median voter .
summary statistics for key variables in the baseline samples are reported intable 1 . while each sample constitutes only a subset of the larger population of local jurisdictions that existed during this timeframe, their characteristics are generally representative of the larger populations.19 3. empirical design for both municipalities and school districts, the relationship between income segregation and per capita spending in jurisdiction i during time t is modeled as  lny it 1seginc it xit r i t i tgi it  where lnyitmeasures the natural logarithm of a particular type of percapita spending, xitis a vector of time varying co variates likely to in uence per capita spending, such as income inequality, log median income, log population, and log per capita intergovernmental aid received   r i tis a time varying region by year xed effect for i s census region, r, during period t. the term iis a jurisdiction level xed effect capturing permanent unobserved heterogeneity across areas and giis a heterogeneous growth trend unique to i itaccounts for unobserved time varying idiosyncrasies. the variable of primary interest, seginc it, is one of the two proposed measures of income segregation, gini or theil. the parameter  1therefore re ects the causal effect of income segregation on per capita spending.
unobserved time invariant cross jurisdictional variation implicit in i is controlled for by taking decade over decade rst differences of .
this yields the following estimating equation lny it 1 seginc it xit r i t gi it  which can be estimated using traditional xed effects techniques. notice that this approach allows the idiosyncratic growth term, gi,t ob e controlled for across all jurisdiction, thus neutralizing a major potential source of unobserved variation and bias xed jurisdiction speci c growth trends. with the inclusion of region by year xed effects unobserved time varying regional trends, such as those tied to deindustrialization in the midwest or growth in the sunbelt, also become weaker threats to identi cation.
3.1. correcting for the endogeneity of course, even in light of the strong set of statistical controls discussed above, simple ols estimates of eq. are unlikely to return unbiased estimates of income segregation s impact on per capita spending, as segregation is almost certainly endogenous. for example, per capita spending on speci c services may itself in uence income segregation through sorting. highly localized public services such as parks, public transportation, or public housing may disproportionally attract particular income classes to a neighborhood, thus resulting in increased income segregation. reductions in local public spending may also promote income segregation if, for example, said reductions incentivize the wealthy to form and locate near self nanced clubs amenities as an alternative.20a failure to account for these and other sources of reverse causality may bias estimates of income segregation s true impact by confounding segregation s response to spending with its impact on spending. notice that the direction of this potential bias is ambiguous.
alternatively, unobserved factors that impact public expenditure, such as a community s taste for redistributive spending or the presence of spatially xed amenities or commercial industrial activity that in uence the tax base, may also be correlated with income segregation. for example, in a closed system where spatial sorting occurs only within jurisdictions, it is not unreasonable to expect that communities with a higher concentration of tax base enhancing commercial industrial activity also exhibit higher levels of income sorting.
allowing for interjurisdictional mobility, scal sorting in the spirit of tiebout suggests that households will move across jurisdictions in order to better align a community s provision of local public services with their own preference ordering, often with an eye towards limiting the level of redistributive payments they will have to make.
evidence also suggests that racial sorting explains much of the suburbanization that occurred in the u.s. after world war ii . if interjurisdictional sorting along either of these lines, scal or demographic, impacts income segregation within origin and or destination communities21in a way that is correlated with the presence of commercial industrial activity or tastes for redistributive public spending, then the impact of segregation may be confounded with unobserved variation the community s tax base or in its median voter s preferences.
again, the direction of this potential bias is ambiguous.
to control for these potential sources of endogeneity, i instrument for seginc itusing a shift share index designed to capture temporal variation in income segregation within a jurisdiction that is independent of reverse causality or spatial sorting. notably, this instrument predicts the variation in seginc itthat would have occurred if the spatial distribution of family incomes within the jurisdiction did not change after 1970 and 197018the minnesota population center provides all socio economic data for cities and towns, including tabulations from the1980 2000 decennial censuses and the 2008 2012 american community survey . data for school districts comes from several sources. tabulations from the 1980 decennial census are provided by the u.s. census bureau , data from the 2000 census are provided by the u.s. department of education , and 2008 2012 american community survey data is again provided by manson .
although the u.s. department of education also provides school district tabu lations from the 1990 census, this le has contained inaccuracies in the past.
thus, school district data for 1990 is constructed by aggregating block group level data provided by manson up to the level of individual school districts using the same geographic crosswalk used to measure of income segre gation. see appendix c .
19seetable b1 in the appendix for summary statistics of considerably larger balanced samples of municipalities and school districts.20seebanzhaf and walsh for models relating exogenous variation in localized public goods to economic and racial segregation. see diamond  ,couture et al. and almagro and dom nguez iino for recent research on endogenous amenities and spatial sorting.
21seeshertzer and walsh for recent evidence of the effect that in migrants settlement patterns, and native residents subsequent sorting responses, have on racial segregation within a community.r.m. gallagher regional science and urban economics 90 103710 6family incomes simply grew every decade in accordance with their national trend, with a different growth rate applied to each income level based on its position along the 1970 income distribution.22 in practice, this instrument simply extrapolates the spatial distribution of family incomes from the 1970 census onto future decades.23 digitized block group income tabulationsfrom the 1970 census stf5c le allow me to rst determine the spatial distribution of families across 15 income bins . using microdata, a nationally representative sample of families from the 1970 census is then used to calculate the percentile range corresponding to each income bin based on its upper and lower bound.
24for each subsequent decade, 1970 families are then assigned the income level that corresponds to the median income of their respective income bin s percentile range for that year. by anchoring a jurisdiction s spatial distribution of family incomes to its lagged 1970 level and then simulating future distributions by allowing these 1970 values to evolve over time only in accordance with a spatial nationwide trends, the temporal variation in the simulated distributions should be independent of spatial sorting at the local level as well as contemporary sources of reverse causality between public sector spending and income segregation. instruments are developed by simply applying the appropriate formulas for the gini and theil indexes to the simulated block group level income distributions.25 because incomes falling along the highest end of the income distribution have typically experienced some of the highest rates of growth since 1970, cities whose wealthiest families were more unevenlydistributed across block groups in 1970 are likely to experience the greatest increases in simulated income segregation over time. of course, there must be a suf cient amount of stickiness in a jurisdiction s spatial distribution of incomes in order for this type of instrument to have much strength. while observed patterns of gentri cation and neighborhood change in large central cities suggests that the assumption of pure neighborhood stickiness is quite strong, housing s general durability as well as the spatial xedness of many amenities and infrastructure investments give reason to believe that many neighborhood s that were relatively wealthy in 1970 are likely still relatively well off today, as arethose that were middle class and lower income in 1970.
26 indeed, the instruments constructed for each sample are very strong predictors of the temporal variation in income segregation occurring within jurisdictions. to see this, panels a and b of fig. 3 plot out the conditional rst stage relationship between decadal changes in the gini index of income segregation and decadal changes in its instrument for municipalities and school districts, respectively. in both cases, changes in the instrument track closely with changes in income segregation. the  rst stage coef cients reported in panel a and panel b are 1.006 and 1.224, respectively and the f statistic for each excluded instrument indicates a strong rst stage . altogether, these patterns suggest that much of the temporal variation in a community s spatial income distribution can be explained by changes in the nationwide family income distribution interacted with pre existing spatial patterns. a more complete set of rst stage statistics is provided in appendix table b2 .
alternative instruments built up from 1960 tract level family income distributions supplement the 1970 block group level instruments. with the exception of their reliance on census tracts, these 1960 instruments are constructed in nearly identical fashion to their 1970 block group counterparts. because these 1960 instruments are grounded in a deeper temporal lag they offer the advantage of being arguably more likely to satisfy the necessary exclusion restriction the spatial distribution of 1960 family incomes is less likely than the 1970 distribution to in uence the future growth trajectory of local public spending. however, drawbacks include fewer observations and, due to tracts broader geographic coverage, noisier instruments.27 4. results ols estimates for municipalities and uni ed school districts are provided in table 2 . due to the potential endogeneity of segregation, these estimates should be interpreted with a bit of caution. still, it is worthwhile noting that across all columns the estimated coef cients for income segregation are negative and statistically precise. higher levels of income segregation do appear to be associated with lower levels of percapita spending. these estimates remain relatively stable as additional covariates are added to the model . this is reassuring in that it suggests omitted variables are perhaps unlikely to be a major source of estimation bias on their own. the coef cient estimates for the mean to median income ratio also corroborate the view that decisive voters respond to lower tax prices by broadening their support for a more expansive local government . although these estimates lose precision with the inclusion of jurisdiction level xed effects, these ndings are generally consistent with earlier estimates provided by corcoran and evans and22notice that the lagged distribution of family incomes is used to predict the distribution of household income. one problem with relying on the 1970 household income distribution to simulate household income segregation forlater years is that the 1970 census tabulates households across only eight income bins. all later censuses allowed for far more variation in household incomes . informationon the 1970 household income distribution is therefore relatively coarse which,in turn, weakens the instrument. for reasons that are unclear, the 1970 census does tabulate families across 15 income bins, thus allowing for a better instrument. more importantly, the 1970 census tabulates household incomes for onlyrelatively large units of geography and not for geographically ne block groups and enumeration districts, which are the primary geographic units used to construct measures of income segregation in this study. however, familyincome tabulations for block groups and enumeration districts are available for the 1970 census, as are income tabulations for primary individuals.
23to qualify for the baseline sample, jurisdictions must have contained at least three full blocks groups in 1970.
24the 1970 stf5c le is distributed by the national archives and records administration. go to https www.archives.gov  research census 1970 statistics for further details. microdata is provided by  .
25for example, the second highest income bin from the 1970 census includes families reporting annual incomes between 1000 and 1,999, which corresponds to the 2.3rd and 5.6th percentile of the 1970 family income distribution.
the median income for families within the 2.3rd and 5.6th percentile of the1980 u.s. income distribution was 3110 . this shift share approach to simulating the local income distribution mirrors that of boustan et al. , although i rely on 1970 block group level income distributions in place of a spatial citywide distributions.26the high degree of stickiness in a neighborhood s relative income is evident in the data. ranking a jurisdiction s census tracts by median household incomefor the years 1970 and 2010 and regressing a tract s 2010 percentile rank onto its 1970 percentile rank, while controlling for jurisdiction level xed effects, returns a conditional rank rank correlation coef cient of 0.532 . a one percentage point increase in a tract s 1970 position along the household income distribution corresponds to a 0.532 percentage point increase in its 2010 position. this suggests a considerable level of persistence ina tract s relative position over a 40 year timespan. to better frame this observation, chetty et al. estimate a rank rank coef cient of 0.341 for the relative rate of intergenerational mobility within the u.s . the persistence in relative income appears to be greater for neighborhoods than it is for families. jurisdictions are limited to cities from the baseline sample that could be matched to the longi tudinal census tract data provided by logan et al. and having at least ve census tracts. n 15,374. full estimates are available upon request.
27seeappendix c for a discussion of how 1960 census tracts are assigned to jurisdictions.r.m. gallagher regional science and urban economics 90 103710 7fig. 3. first stage relationships between changes in income segregation and changes in their instrument. plotted points measure residuals from a rst stage regression of the variable measured along the axis onto all of the covariates included in eq. . please see the text for further details. coef cient estimates and fstatistic for the excluded instrument are reported. see table b2 in the appendix for a complete set of rst stage estimates.
table 2 ols estimates of local public expenditures, 1980 2010.
panel a municipalities panel b school districts   a b c d e f   income segregation c00.580   0.172 c00.381   0.167 c00.452   0.190 c00.335   0.160 c00.258   0.150 c00.561   0.169   mean to median inc. 0.142   0.049 0.115   0.060 0.199   0.047 0.084  0.057  adj. r20.17 0.24 0.26 0.66 0.69 0.76 additional rhs no yes yes no yes yescity level fes no no yes no no yesregion by year fes yes yes yes yes yes yes all values re ect ols estimates of eq. . the dependent variable is log and log for municipalities and school districts, respectively. municipal expenditures account for all non education general expenditures as de ned by the census of governments. additional right hand side controls included in the equations but not reported here include log for school districts , log, population share black, population share hispanic, adult share age 65 , the black white dissimilarity index, and the log of per person or per student intergovernmental aid received. for municipalities, only intergovernmental aid for non educational purposes is included. standard errors are cluster ed at the level of individual municipality and are reported in brackets. see text for further details. p c200.01, p c200.05, p c200.1.
table 3 iv estimates of local public sector expenditures, 1980 2010.
panel a municipalities panel b school districts 1970 iv 1960 iv 1970 iv 1960 iv   a b c d e f g h   income segregation c01.785   0.650 c03.101   0.942 c01.871   0.768 c02.703   1.145 c01.757   0.512 c02.519   0.689 c02.103   0.566 c03.093   0.811   mean to median inc. 0.314   0.097 0.340   0.122 0.234   0.087 0.311   0.098  first stage f stat. 166.8 89.1 106.9 60.1 89.4 59.7 65.1 37.7 additional rhs no yes no yes no yes no yes city level fes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes region by year fes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes all values re ect 2sls estimates of eq. using instruments discussed in the text. the dependent variable is log and log for municipalities and school districts, respectively. municipal expenditures account for all non education general expenditures a sd e ned by the census of governments. additional right hand side controls included in the equations but not reported here include log for school districts , log, population share black, population share hispanic, adult share age 65 , the black white dissimilarity index, and the log of per person or per student inter governmental aid received. for municipalities, only inter governmental aid for non educational purposes is included. additional  rst stage and second stage estimates are provided in tables b2 and b3 of the appendix, respectively. standard errors are clustered at the level of individual jurisdiction and are reported in brackets. see text for further details. p c200.01, p c200.05, p c200.1.r.m. gallagher regional science and urban economics 90 103710 8boustan et al. . all in all, the local public sector appears to respond considerably differently to rising income segregation than it does to rising income inequality. the potential implications of this divergence are examined more thoroughly below.
turning to the iv estimates reported in table 3 , income segregation does appear to have a strong negative impact on municipal spending.
these estimates are considerably larger in magnitude than those reported intable 2 , thus supporting the view that sorting within and between jurisdictions is a potentially major source of upward bias in the ols estimates. as discussed above, this is consistent with scenarios where public spending incentivizes income sorting. alternatively, this could be explained if increased income sorting through either intrainterjurisdictional mobility was associated with an unobserved rise in the community s tax base, perhaps due to increased commercial or industrial activity. this observation is also in line with other studies into the causal impact of demographic characteristics on local public spending when spatial sorting is potentially confounding .
alternative explanations, such as the instrument s ability to correct for measurement error, are also plausible.28 notice also that income segregation s impact on expenditures is considerably more pronounced when the control for a spatial income inequality, the mean to median income ratio, is included as a covariate.
this likely re ects the iv s conditional exogeneity since both the mean to median income ratio and the iv likely rise with a widening of the nationwide income distribution.the estimates presented columns b , d , f , and h of table 3 are therefore likely to most accurately re ect the causal impact of income segregation.
to the extent that these iv estimates can be interpreted as causal, they suggest that the average increase in city town income segregation from 1980 to 2010 caused a 56 real decline in per capita municipal spending.
29real growth in per capita expenditures over this timeframe would therefore have been approximately 12 percent higher on average had it not been for income segregation s rise 2010 per capita expenditures would have been just above 5 percent higher. estimates derived from the 1960 tract based instruments corroborate these results. income segregation appears to have a considerable downward effect on school district spending as well, as reported in columns e and f of table 3 .
rising income segregation between 1980 and 2010 is estimated to have reduced real per pupil spending by an average of 600. this translates to a real per capita expenditure growth rate that would have been 11 percent higher had it not been for rising income segregation. average 2010 per pupil expenditures would therefore be about 5 percent higher.
the 1960 tract based instruments presented in rows g and h are quite similar. altogether, these ndings strongly support the hypothesis that rising income segregation places downward pressure on local public spending.
at this point it is worthwhile revisiting the role of a spatial income inequality, as measured by the mean to median income ratio, and how it interacts with income segregation in the present context. the iv estimates presented in table 2 clearly point to a strong positive association between a spatial income inequality and public spending, which is consistent with the theoretical and empirical local public nance literature to date. however, a widening income distribution also appears to contribute to rising income segregation. income inequality therefore in uences local public spending through at least these two channels the median voter s tax prices and income segregation. these two channels, however, have opposing effects. indeed, over the 1980 2010 period the negative effect of rising income segregation on public spendingoverwhelms considerably the positive impact of rising a spatial inequality . this emphasizes the need to take a fuller accounting of the various channels through which a widening income distribution may in uence local public nances. studies that focus exclusively on the role a spatial income inequality may be overlooking a critical input into local spending decisions income segregation. for example, boustan et al. predict that growth in per capita municipal spending over the 1970 2000 period would have been 22 percent lower had it not been for rising a spatial income inequality over that same timeframe. similarly, corcoran evans estimate that per pupil education expenditures would have grown 12 to 22 percent slower over the 1970 to 2000 period if it had not for rising income inequality. the estimates presented here suggest that rising income segregation may act as a considerable counterweight to these scal effects of a widening income distribution.
table 4 reports the main results from a series of robustness checks where alternative samples and speci cations are used to re estimate models similar to eq. . row a of table 4 establishes a point of reference by re publishing the baseline iv estimates of income segregation s impact, 1, taken from columns b and f of table 3 , respectively.
subsequent rows then report estimates of 1after introducing the change  summarized in that row s header. for example, row b provides estimates after introducing outlier observations back into the sample. this includes all observations where the decadal change in per capita spending fell within the top or bottom percentile. rows c   e address lingering concerns that rising income segregation may be positively correlated with unobserved increases in a spatial income inequality through growth in the upper tail of the community s income distribution. any unobserved growth in upper tail incomes may increase the local tax base or reduce the median voter s tax price in a way that is correlated with income segregation, thus resulting in upwardly biased estimates of income segregation s true impact. row c adds the log of the 75th percentile of household income as an additional control for income.row d simply replaces the log of median household income with the log of mean household income, whereas row e expands upon row d by including a 4th order polynomial of the log of mean household income.
there is generally little evidence presented in these rows to suggest that the baseline estimates are overly biased from unobserved growth in high incomes. however, the estimates presented in row e for municipalities table 4 alternative iv estimates of local public sector expenditures, 1980 2010.
municipalities school districts  a baseline c03.101   0.942 c02.519   0.689   b add outliers c03.215   0.959 c02.673   0.825   c add log c03.211   1.001 c02.638   0.720   d use log c03.091   0.940 c02.532   0.687   e use log 4th order poly. c04.902   1.443 c02.749   1.026   f no area limit c04.146   0.908 c02.782   0.607   g limit to area c205 c02.661   0.917 c02.963   0.909   h add 1970 gini by year c02.551   1.164 c01.710   0.635  the rst line of each cell reports the estimate of the coef cient for income segregation from eq. . the dependent variable is log and log for municipalities and school districts, respectively. all right hand side variables, including jurisdiction level xed effects and region by year xed effects are included. all samples are balanced. n  3930 for municipalities and n 1206 for school districts unless noted otherwise in the row header. standard errors are clustered at the level of individual juris diction and are reported in brackets. see notes to table 3 and text for further details. p c200.01, p c200.05, p c200.1.28seelogan et al. andreardon et al. regarding the potential for bias in sample based estimates of income segregation.
29all calculations are based on the statistics summarized in table 1 and the estimates presented in columns b and f of table 3 .r.m. gallagher regional science and urban economics 90 103710 9indicate that this type of confoundedness cannot be ruled out entirely.
still, the estimates for income segregation remain negative, large, and statistically precise within each of these rows, thus reinforcing the evidence of income segregation s negative effect of local public expenditures.
rows f and g relax and tighten the land area sample restriction, respectively. if, for example, changes in a jurisdiction s land area impacted the per capita cost of services and changes in land area were also correlated with simulated changes in income segregation, then the iv estimates could be biased. this could occur if, for example, a jurisdiction s initial level of income segregation in uenced its future annexation decisions. row f addresses this by eliminating the land area restriction entirely from the balanced samples these larger samples are summarized in panel a of table b1 in the appendix. row g tightens the land area restriction considerably for both municipalities and school districts, requiring that the observed increase or decrease in land area between 1980 and 2010 be no more than ve percent. altogether, varying these restrictions has little impact on the estimates general interpretation however, the municipality estimates do appear to be more sensitive to how much land area is allowed to change. this is perhaps because the per capita cost of certain municipal services, such as sewers and roads, are more sensitive to population density.30 the last row of table 4 , h , further addresses the concern that the shift share instrument itself may violate the critical exclusion restriction.
one could argue, for example, that a municipality s level of income segregation in 1970 set off a series of unobserved events that explainfuture changes in that city or town s per capita spending. because these unobserved events would also be correlated with the instrument they could be driving the iv results.
31to test for this possibility, row h introduces 1970 income segregation by year effects into the model. these terms effectively control for any unobserved timevarying in uence that 1970 income segregation levels have on future changes in per capita spending. the estimates reported in h do not deviate much from those provided in a , suggesting that the iv approach adopted here has successfully identi ed exogenous variation in income segregation.32 altogether, the values reported in rows b h suggest that the model s baseline iv estimates are relatively robust to the composition of the sample as well as to a host of potentially confounding unobservables.
income segregation s estimated effect does vary from row to row but the estimates are nearly all negative, large in magnitude, and statistically precise. these patterns are therefore reassuring in that they point to only weak in uence of model misspeci cation or omitted variables. income segregation appears to have a negative impact on per capita spending across wide variety of assumptions.
municipalities provide a broad range of services so it is useful to decompose income segregation s impact across separate spending categories. table 5 reports estimates of eq. across six types of local public service. because municipalities vary in the services that they provide, only those reporting positive expenditures on a particular service in each of the four census years from 1980 to 2010 are included in that service s sample. this restriction helps to assure that the municipalities re ected in a given set of estimates are relatively comparable. for reference, row  a of table 5 re publishes column b of table 3 . with the exception ofpublic safety, which bulks large in most municipal budgets, income segregation s negative effect on spending appears to be distributed broadly across service categories. notice, however, that the geographic distribution of service reductions is unknown, which is certainly a topic that warrants further investigation in the future.
lastly, it is natural to inquire about the sources of revenue that fund local government spending and how these revenue streams themselves respond to rising income segregation. presumably, reduced support for local public expenditure translates directly to declines in revenues.
however, more nuanced aspects of this relationship, such as theresponsiveness of intergovernmental aid to changing income segregation, require attention. the types of local government studied here, municipalities and school districts, rely heavily on the property tax to  nance their operations within the baseline samples an average of 41.3 of municipal revenues and 48.3 of school district revenues come from the property tax. the next largest funding source is intergovernmental aid .
other major sources of revenue, such as sales taxes and user fees, account for smaller shares. of these revenue sources, the property tax is arguably the most responsive to the local political mechanisms linking income segregation to public spending, as it provides a considerable share of own source revenues and is a very salient base from which redistributive local spending is nanced . intergovernmental aid may also respond to changes in income segregation if, for instance, the aid is conditional on local spending levels, such as with federal matching grants. in cases such as these, it is reasonable to expect intergovernmental aid to decline with rising income segregation. matching grants will naturally decline as self nanced expenditures shrink. other forms of intergovernmental aid, such as state aid for school nance equalization, may be less directly responsive to income segregation if they are based on a pre determined formula that mostly ignore issues related to income segregation. for example, state aid for school nance equalization is largely determined by a district s per pupil property tax base .
table 6 documents iv estimates of eq. for municipalities using thetable 5 iv estimates of municipal expenditures by service type, 1980 2010.
 a baseline  c03.101   0.942   b public safety c00.607  1.548   c transportation c04.863   2.137   d water sewer c05.672   3.333   e solid waste mgmt. c09.313   5.563   f low income assistance c01.38  6.653   g parks recreation c07.671   2.675  the rst line of each cell reports the estimate of the coef cient for income segregation from eq. . the dependent variable is log for a particular service type. public safety expenditures include those for police, re, and corrections. transportation spending includes transit subsidies and highway expenditures. low income assistance expenditures include those for health and hospitals, housing and community development, and welfare payments. all right hand side variables,including jurisdiction level xed effects and region by year xed effects are included. the size of each balanced sample is noted in the row header.
standard errors are clustered at the level of individual municipality and are reported in brackets. see note to table 3 and text for further details. p c20 0.01, p c200.05, p c200.1.
30seeholcombe and williams ,hortas rico and sol c19e oll c19e ,de duren and compe c19an , and ahlfeldt and pietrostefani for recent research on this subject.
31seefiglio and fletcher and bouston et al. for similar approaches to addressing this concern within a panel framework. jaeger, ruist and stuhler and borusyak et al. provide formal treatments of this problem. see also jaeger et al. andgoldsmith pinkham, sorkin and swift  .
32the rst stage estimates underlying the values reported in h also retain considerable predictive power. these estimates are available upon request.r.m. gallagher regional science and urban economics 90 103710 10log of per capita total revenues, per capita property tax receipts, or percapita total intergovernmental aid received as dependent variables.33 table 7 provides the same set of estimates for school districts. estimates of income segregation s impact on total revenues are summarized in columns a and b and closely mirror the estimates presented in table 3 in sign, magnitude, and precision. this is not unexpected given that most local governments are subject to balanced budget constraints requiring them to closely align expenditures with revenues. the estimates for property tax collections summarized in columns c and d are also quite similar. given that the property tax constitutes the main type of ownsource revenues for municipalities and school districts, these estimates point to the property tax as a major channel through which local government spending likely responds to changing income segregation.34 turning to column e of table 6 , income segregation s negative impact on municipal intergovernmental aid is consistent with the view that weakened support for locally nanced spending reduces the level of external aid that is available through matching grants. this of course magni es the downward pressure that income segregation has on overall revenues, as is evident in column b of table 6 .
returning to table 7 , the strong negative relationship between school district property tax collections and intergovernmental aid is of particularinterest, as it points to outside aid s role as an important scal offset for districts with low property tax collections. this is consistent with the literature on state equalization nancing . however, income segregation s estimated impact on propertytaxes is relatively insensitive to the inclusion of intergovernmental aid as a covariate, suggesting that income segregation and outside aid are largely uncorrelated. column e makes this point more explicitly.
intergovernmental aid appears to provide very little to offset changes in districts own source revenues resulting from rising or falling income segregation. this supports the idea that pre determined formulas determining intergovernmental aid to school districts are generally insensitive to income sorting within districts. in this regard, income segregation has a potentially more potent overall impact on school districts nances when compared to a spatial income inequality, as the direct effect of the latter is more likely to be at least partially offset by state aid intended to equalize school district nances.
35 5. conclusion income inequality s rapid rise in the united states since 1980 is well documented , as are some of its potential consequences . another aspect of the income distribution that changed considerably over this timeframe, but which has received far less attention, is the manner in which communities households are distributed across space by income class. notably, metropolitan areas have become increasingly income segregated since 1980 , as have local political jurisdictions such as the municipalities and school districts documented above. although some observers have speculated on income segregation s societal impact, the causal effects of this growing source of social strati cation have been largely overlooked in the empirical research to date.
using block group level variation in the household income distribution from 1980 to 2010, this paper documents the rapid rise of householdtable 6 iv estimates of municipal revenues, 1980 2010.
total revenue property tax revenue ig aid  a b c d e   income segregation c02.720   0.860 c04.628   1.069 c02.824   1.414 c03.164   1.428 c08.652   2.464   mean to median inc. 0.289 0.584   0.118 0.464   0.162 0.517   0.161 1.337   0.270   log 0.220   0.017 0.037   0.019  n 3930 3875 3930 all values re ect 2sls estimates of eq. using balanced samples. the dependent variable is the log of the per person revenue source identi ed in the column header.
all right hand side variables, including jurisdiction level xed effects and region by year xed effects are included. standard errors are clustered at the level of individual municipality and are reported in brackets. see notes to table 3 and text for further details. p c200.01, p c200.05, p c200.1.
table 7 iv estimates of school district revenues, 1980 2010.
total revenue property tax revenue ig aid  a b c a e   income segregation  c02.942   0.684 c03.109   0.719 c03.760   1.378 c03.297   1.468 c01.41  2.251   mean tomedian inc.0.380   0.089 0.368   0.091 0.541   0.162 0.574   0.188 c00.099  0.261   log 0.118   0.019 c00.328   0.029  n 1206 1206 1206 all values re ect 2sls estimates of eq. using balanced samples. the dependent variable is the log of the per student revenue source identi ed in the column header. all right hand side variables, including jurisdiction level xed effects and region by year xed effects are included. standard errors are clustered at the level of individual municipality and are reported in brackets. see notes to table 3 and text for further details. p c200.01, p c200.05, p c200.1.
33for the property tax regressions, the samples used are balanced subsets of the baseline sample whose estimates are presented in table 3 , with the added restriction being that the local units of government must report positive property tax revenues for each of the four sample years.
34similar regressions using per capita sales tax collections and per capita fees collected yield much weaker results, all lacking in statistical precision. these estimates are available upon request.
35the forces most often associated with rising a spatial income inequality, i.e., growth in the upper tail of a community s income distribution, have the effect of increasing a community s average income and, consequently, are more directlyaccounted for in the equalization formulas many states use to determine aid toschool districts. because equalization programs work to transfer resources from high average wealth jurisdictions to those with lower average wealth, formulas determining state aid are likely to offset any income inequalityinduced changes in own source revenues. for example, the estimates provided here suggest that school districts exhibiting relatively low levels a spatial income inequality may be lessinclined to tax themselves in order to fund local public education services but, by virtue of having relatively low mean income, they may receive higher levels of state aid . boustan et al. provide evidence of this offsetting effect for school districts. however, it appears that the scal effects of income segregation are not subject to this same type of countervailing mechanism, most likely because the forces determining income segregation do not enter as directly into formulas determining intergovernmental aid.r.m. gallagher regional science and urban economics 90 103710 11income segregation within two important forms of local government in the united states municipalities and independent uni ed school districts. when combined with data on local public expenditures, rising income segregation within these jurisdictions is shown to have a large and negative impact on the size of local government, measured as the local public sector s level of per capita spending. all else being equal, the general rise in income segregation over the 1980 2010 period is estimated to have reduced growth in municipal and school district spending by approximately 12 percent and 11 percent, respectively. these effects offset a considerable portion of the increase in local public sector size that researchers have recently attributed to growth in local income inequality.
spending reductions within municipalities appear to be driven by lost revenues from the property tax and intergovernmental aid, while reductions within school districts are driven only by lost property tax collections. although the estimates reported above are based on observed spatial variation in local distributions of money income, spatialheterogeneity in other unobserved factors that enter into the household budget, such as the cost of living and receipt of in kind governmental transfers, are also likely to in uence the segregation of broader wellbeing within a community. while it has been argued that a more thorough accounting of these factors likely narrows the distribution of household living standards and well being , it is unclear how such an accounting would impact changes in local income segregation over time. i leave it to future inquires to investigate this issue more fully.
declaration of competing interest the authors declare that they have no known competing nancial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to in uence the work reported in this paper.
appendix a appendix. a simple model income segregation and local political economy the following stylized model formalizes some of the economic rationale for income segregation s impact on local public spending discussed in the text. this model is only intended to be suggestive.
setting aside for the moment the issues of space and segregation, the ith individual s utility function is assumed to take the following quasi linear form  ui u q ci i q  e i ci 0 1  where qis the quantity of local public service consumed and cimeasures private consumption. here, the parameter i2 0 c138 measures the absolute distance between i s preferred type of local public service bundle and the type actually consumed, with higher values of i corresponding to a poorer match.36an individual s budget constraint balances the cost of private consumption against local public taxation  yi ci ti  where tiis i s unique tax burden. because qis measured at cost, a balanced public sector budget requires that q pn i 1tiwhere n indexes for the total number of tax paying individuals. assuming all individuals pay the same lump sum tax q nti ti q n. this simply states the each individual faces a tax burden equivalent to their share of the public service s overall cost. substituting this into the constraint yields  yi ci 1 nq  where1 nis simply the ith individual s tax price . rearranging and substituting back into returns the following objective function  ui q  e i yi c01 nq  which the ith individual seeks to maximize by voting for their optimal quantity of local public good, qi. this maximization problem implies that individuals decide on qionly after considering taxation s impact on their budget and the degree to which the type of public service bundle provided deviates from their preferred bundle.
to see the in uence of the iparameter in more useful detail we de ne the various types of potential service bundles along a continuum, x, and treat the ith individual s optimal service bundle, xi, as an increasing function of their income, such that xi x yi anddxi dyi 0. de ning xas the service bundle actually provided by the local jurisdiction allows ito be restated as i jx c0x yi j. equation then becomes  ui q  ejx c0x yi j yi c01 nq  which makes it clear that a voter s tastes are single peaked in the type of local service bundle provided jurisdiction wide, x, such that higher income 36this function is modeled off of earlier work by alesina et al. .r.m. gallagher regional science and urban economics 90 103710 12voters prefer higher value for x. . similarly, individual preferences are single peaked in qsuch that voters with higher jx c0x yi jand1 n prefer lower q. to see this, an individual s optimal quantity of public spending, qi, is solved for as  qi c18 n ejx c0x yi j c191 1 c0    where the i subscript on qdenotes the ith individual s optimal quantity.  fig. a1. single peaked preferences in x.
fig. a2. single peaked preferences in q.
this simple model of consumer choice can be straightforwardly extended to show how the spatial distribution of income interacts with the organization of local government to impact local public spending outcomes. here, emphasis is placed on the special role of geographically delineated political districts within representative democracies and how the distribution of income across space in uences the behavior of a jurisdiction s decisive district. this approach is consistent with the model of representative democracy adopted in most local jurisdictions within the u.s., whereby, for example, elected city council or school board members who vote on jurisdiction wide outcomes each represent only those residents residing within a speci c area of the jurisdiction, such as a city ward or school district attendance zone.
consider a local jurisdiction that is subdivided into d non overlapping geographic districts, such as city wards or school district attendance zone s, where voters incomes are assumed to be identical within districts but potentially varying across districts.37each district directly elects a representative to serve on a committee that decides jurisdiction wide outcomes, such as a city council or school district board. committees themselves decide spend ing outcomes through two sequential rounds of voting, with the winning outcome from each round determined by majority rule. the rst committee vote determines the type of public service bundle to be provided jurisdiction wide whereas the second committee vote determines the level of spending to allocate towards the chosen service bundle.38representatives second round votes are therefore responsive to the type of public service bundle that is to be supported, just as individuals base their optimal quantity of public spending on how well the service bundle matches their unique tastes.
because a voter s optimal type of service bundle increases along a continuum with her income and because tastes are single peaked in the type of service bundle actually consumed, x, districts will elect by majority rule representatives whose preferences align with the district s median income voter. de ning ydas the single income level within the dth district , xd x yd  becomes the dth representative s preferred type of public service bundle.
37this model does not require that these districts be de jure political entities. all that matters is that geographic areas have the ability and capacity to act collectively in a way that can in uence jurisdiction wide local public spending, such as through neighborhood community groups or local chambers of commerce. the assumption of identical incomes within a district is made for notational convenience so that all of a district s voters have an income equivalent to the district s median. this assumption is relaxed at the end of this discussion in order to highlight the ways in which income segregation is independent from a spatial income ine quality.
38this is similar to the two stage voting procedure outlined by alesina et al. , although the order has been reversed. making these votes sequential instead of simultaneous avoids complexities associated with multi dimensional voting.r.m. gallagher regional science and urban economics 90 103710 13next, during the rst round of committee voting the type of service bundle chosen for the entire jurisdiction will be that preferred by whichever district s median income re ects the median across all districts, by.39therefore, x x by de nes the type of public service bundle provided jurisdiction wide, where the superscript denotes a political outcome . note that if median incomes were the same across districts each would then get the type of public service bundle that it most desired, x x1 x2 xd. however, if income segregation were to yield complete heterogeneity in district median incomes such that x16 x26 6 xdthen the type of jurisdiction wide service bundle ultimately chosen will deviate from most of the districts ideal outcomes. notice that neither of these scenarios is sensitive to how household incomes are distributed around a districts median.
fig. a3. choosing x .
turning to the second round of committee voting, because individual preferences are single peaked in q and q ideclines continuously in absolute deviation, jx c0x yi j, individual representatives will prefer whichever level of spending maximizes the utility of the voter with their district s median absolute deviation. because voters have identical incom es within a district we get qd c18  n ejx c0x yd j c19 1 1 c0  as the dth representative s preferred level of spending.
notice that individual representatives preferences, mirroring those of their voters, are also single peaked in qsuch that qddeclines in jx c0x yd j  the winning jurisdiction wide level of spending, q , is therefore whichever quantity is demanded by the district with the median absolute deviation, djx c0x y j40 q c18 n edjx c0x y j c191 1 c0   ln q c01 1 c0 djx c0x y j  where ln n  1 c0 is treated as a constant.  fig. a4. choosing q .
differentiating ln q with respect to income segregation, seg, identi es the median absolute deviation from the median, c12 c12 c12dx c0x y c12 c12 c12, as the single channel through which income segregation potentially impacts local public spending levels  dln q  dseg c01 1 c0 djx c0x y j  seg  income segregation s hypothesized impact on public spending therefore rests on the degree to which it creates distance between a jurisdiction s two decisive districts preferences the preferences of the median income district which determines public spending type,x , and the median absolute 39going forward, the bsymbol always identi es the median value across districts.
40it is important to point out here that the district with the median income across districts will have an absolute deviation of zero. in the presence of in come segregation it is therefore unlikely that this same district has the median absolute deviation.r.m. gallagher regional science and urban economics 90 103710 14deviation district which ultimately determines the level of public spending, q . because a district s preferred public service type increases in its income, this distance can be summarized by the magnitude of the absolute income difference between these two decisive districts.41 within the context of this model rising income segregation can be portrayed simplest as a median preserving widening of the distribution of median incomes across a jurisdiction s xed number of districts. a widening of this type unambiguously increasesdjx c0x y j, thus allowing us to substitute  djx c0x y j  seg 0 into above.42rising income segregation is therefore hypothesized to reduce local public spending levels in a way that is proportional to the degree to which it ampli es the absolute income differences between a jurisdiction s two decisive districts. empirical investigations into income segregation s impact on local public spending should therefore be sure to account for the absolute magnitude of income differences across districts when measuring income segregation. the gini coef cient, which is a measure of the relative mean absolute deviation in incomes, is therefore a potentially useful measure of income segregation.
relaxing the assumption that household incomes be identical within a district helps clarify the important differences between changes in a spatial inequality and changes in income segregation within the context of this model. for example, the widening of a jurisdiction s overall income distribu tion will not impact income segregation if household incomes are already identically distributed within each district rising income inequality would o n its own not affect the relative concentration of income across districts. additionally, overall income inequality within a jurisdiction need not chang ei n order for income segregation to rise or fall. holding a jurisdiction s overall income distribution xed, increased income sorting across districts is suf cient to increase income segregation a decline in sorting is similarly suf cient for there to be a reduction in income segregation. once districts are sorted by income, however, a widening of the overall income distribution would contribute to the growing concentration of income across districts . these examples highlight the degree of freedom that exists between changes in a jurisdiction s overall level o f income inequality and changes in its level of income segregation. one cannot therefore assume that patterns of income inequality and income segregation are always highly correlated. it is therefore appropriate to treat the political economy and comparative statics described above as bei ng potentially independent of any changes in a spatial income inequality that might also occur within a jurisdiction.
b appendix. supplementary statistics table b1 summary statistics for the unrestricted and iv samples, 1980 and 2010 mean std. dev. min max mean std. dev. min max panel a balanced samples without land area restriction panel a1 municipalities panel a2 school districts  1980 levels gini 0.12 0.05 0.01 0.28 0.14 0.04 0.04 0.27 theil 0.03 0.02 0.00 0.12 0.03 0.02 0.00 0.12 mean to median income 1.14 0.10 0.87 1.63 1.14 0.09 0.98 1.48exp. per capita 0.60 0.28 0.09 2.89 5.82 1.60 3.02 15.13changes   gini 0.03 0.04 c00.14 0.21 0.04 0.03 c00.07 0.15  theil 0.02 0.02 c00.07 0.14 0.02 0.02 c00.03 0.13  mean to median income 0.12 0.12 c00.47 0.84 0.13 0.10 c00.30 0.53  exp. per capita 0.44 0.32 c00.64 2.39 4.66 2.44 0.35 20.95 panel b balanced samples without land area and iv restrictions panel b1 municipalities panel b2 school districts  1980 levels gini 0.12 0.05 0.01 0.31 0.14 0.04 0.04 0.27theil 0.03 0.02 0 0.16 0.03 0.02 0 0.12mean to median income 1.15 0.1 0.87 1.66 1.14 0.09 0.98 1.5exp. per capita 0.59 0.27 0.09 2.89 5.63 1.55 3.02 15.13 changes   gini 0.03 0.04 c00.14 0.23 0.04 0.03 c00.07 0.15  theil 0.01 0.02 c00.07 0.17 0.02 0.02 c00.03 0.13  mean to median income 0.12 0.12 c00.47 1.21 0.13 0.1 c00.3 0.53  exp. per capita 0.45 0.32 c00.67 2.97 4.58 2.3 c00.06 20.95 panel a the municipality sample tracks 2022 individual cities towns over four time periods . municipalities are limited to those fully containing at least ve block groups for each of the years 1980 2010, a 1970 population of at least 5,000, and having at least three block groups in 1970. the school district sample tracks 886 individual uni ed school districts over four time periods . independent uni ed school districts are limited to those fully containing at least ve block groups for each of the years 1980 2010, having at least 100 students enrolled in 1970, and containing at least three block groups in 1970. municipal expenditures exclude education expenditures.
panel b the municipality sample tracks 2495 individual cities towns over four time periods . municipalities are limited to those fully containing at least ve block groups for each of the years 1980 2010 and a 1970 population of at least 5000. the school district sample tracks 1099 individual uni ed school districts over four time periods . independent uni ed school districts are limited to those fully containing at least ve block groups for each of the years 1980 2010 and having at least 100 students enrolled in 1970.
the term per capita means per person for municipalities and per student for school districts. all dollar values are reported in terms of 2010 dollars. see text for further details.
41notice that a more appropriate measure of distance will be likely unit free , such as the absolute percentage difference,jx c0x yd j x yd .
42notice thatdjx c0x y jis simply the median absolute deviation of the distribution of median incomes across districts this rises with a distribution s standard deviation.r.m. gallagher regional science and urban economics 90 103710 15table b2 first stage regression statistics panel a municipalities panel b school districts 1970 iv 1960 iv 1970 iv 1960 iv   income segregation iv 1.006   0.106 0.951   0.123 1.224   0.158 1.163   0.19   mean to median inc. 0.049   0.008 0.07   0.007 0.039   0.013 0.051   0.014   log 0.04   0.014 0.03   0.012 0.017   0.009 0.011  0.009   log 0.002  0.009 0.016   0.008 c00.01  0.014 c00.013  0.013   pop. share black 0.007  0.017 c00.003  0.019 0.053  0.035 0.043  0.034   pop. share hispanic 0.018  0.026 0.008  0.0278 c00.0129  0.05 c00.054  0.015   adult share 65 0.03  0.029 0.005  0.032 0.04  0.046 0.029  0.046   log 0.000  0.001 c00.4 c210 c03  0.001 0.000  0.002 0.001  0.002   b w dissimilarity 0.006   0.003 0.003  0.004 c00.002  0.006 c00.007  0.006  f stat. for excluded instrument 89.1 60.1 59.7 37.7 jurisdiction level fes yes yes yes yes region by year fes yes yes yes yes all values re ect the rst stage of 2sls estimates of eq. using the baseline samples summarized in table 1 . the dependent variable is the gini of income segregation, as described in the text. school district population is measured using student enrollment. intergovernmental aid for municipalities is for non edu cation transfers only.
standard errors are clustered at the level of the individual jurisdiction and are reported in brackets. see text for further details. p c200.01, p c200.05, p c200.1.
table b3 complete iv estimates panel a municipalities panel b school districts 1970 iv 1960 iv 1970 iv 1960 iv   income segregation iv c03.101   0.942 c02.703   1.145 c02.519   0.689 c03.093   0.811   mean to median inc. 0.314   0.097 0.340   0.122 0.234   0.087 0.311   0.098   log c00.282   0.101 c00.215   0.127 c00.380   0.049 c00.367   0.055   log 0.424   0.080 0.447   0.093 0.094  0.066 0.088  0.068   pop. share black 0.177  0.139 0.059  0.171 0.173  0.198 0.064  0.217   pop. share hispanic c00.491   0.286 c00.319  0.263 c00.023  0.227 0.124  0.269   adult share 65 0.345  0.262 0.534   0.300 c00.377   0.228 c00.422   0.242   log 0.085   0.012 0.082   0.013 0.068   0.011 0.069   0.011   b w dissimilarity c00.090   0.033 c00.090   0.038 c00.043  0.032 c00.047  0.034  jurisdiction level fes yes yes yes yes region by year fes yes yes yes yes all values re ect the full set of 2sls estimates of eq. reported in table 3 . see note to table 3 for further details.r.m. gallagher regional science and urban economics 90 103710 16fig. b1. correlations between decadal changes in gini for income segregation and other key variables municipalities.
fig. b2. first stage relationship between changes in gini for income segregation and its instrument, 1960 tract based iv.
appendix c. geographic crosswalks and land areas geographic crosswalks assigning census block groups to jurisdiction borders are constructed from a variety of sources. the 1970 crosswalk for citie s and towns comes from the master enumeration district list published as part of the 1970 decennial census . the 1970 crosswalk for school districts was produced from the school district geographic reference le for 1969 70, also published by the census bureau . the 1980 crosswalk for cities and towns comes from the master area reference file 2 published as part of the 1980 decennial census . the marf3 is used for 1980 school districts . the 1990 crosswalk for cities and towns is taken from the missouri census data center s geographic correspondence engine . for 1990 school districts, the crosswalk is constructed from the u.s. census bureau s 1992 tiger line les . city, town, and school district crosswalks for 2000 and 2010 are all taken from the missouri census data center s geographic correspondence engine . for any particular year, a crosswalk includes only those block groups whose boundaries fall 100 within a single jurisdiction.
crosswalks assigning 1960 census tracts to 1980 city town boundaries are constructed using digitized 1960 census tract maps and digitized 1980 city town maps provided by manson et al. . geographic information system software is used to assign 1960 census tracts to 1980 city and town boundaries. tracts are limited to those with 90 100 of their land area within a single city or town. digitized city town maps provided by manson et al. are also used to measure a city s or town s for each of the decennial census years 1980 2010.
digitized school district maps are not readily available for 1980 or 1990. in order to construct a crosswalk that assigns 1960 tracts to 1980 sds, 1980 sd boundaries rst are approximated by assigning 1980 block group coordinates to the bg to sd crosswalk discussed above. coordinates for 1980 block groups are provided by the u.s. census bureau, 1993 and are digitized using gis software. like with cities towns, a crosswalk assigningr.m. gallagher regional science and urban economics 90 103710 171960 census tracts to 1980 school districts is then put together by assigning the 1960 tract map provided by manson et al. to the digitized map approximating 1980 school district boundaries. tracts are limited to those with 90 100 of their land area within a single district. for consistency of method in measuring school district land areas over time, bg to sd crosswalks, along with digitized block group maps, are used to approximate a district s land area for each of the census years 1980 2010.
author statement all work was completed by ryan m. gallagher. i have no nancial sources to disclose.
appendix d. supplementary data supplementary data to this article can be found online at https doi.org 10.1016 j.regsciurbeco.2021.103710 .
references