cities 110 103067 available online 14 december 2020 0264 2751 2020 the authors. published by elsevier ltd. this is an open access article under the cc by nc nd license .a realistic and multilevel measurement of citywide spatial patterns of  economic segregation based on human activities  mengling qiaoa, yandong wanga,b,c, , shanmei wua, xiaokang fua, yanyan gua,  mingxuan doua  astate key laboratory of information engineering in surveying, mapping and remote sensing, wuhan university, wuhan, china  bcollaborative innovation centre for geospatial information technology, wuhan university, wuhan, china  cfaculty of geomatics, east china university of technology, nanchang, china  article info  keywords  human activity  collective activity space  economic segregation pattern  ice  tfidf abstract  research on the realistic and comprehensive identification of citywide spatial patterns of economic segregation is  valuable for the sustainable development of cities. the consideration of human activities in segregation research  inspires us to develop an alternative method to contribute to this type of research. in our method, we emphasize  the combination of collective activity spaces and spatial economic data, both of which are obtained from  dynamic human activities. we first reveal the realistic use of urban spaces from human mobility patterns to  generate multilevel cass as basic analytical units. then, we use a type of realistic economic data generated from  human activities to measure the segregation level of each cas. we realize this measurement by tailoring a  segregation index, named the term frequency inverse document frequency index of concentration at the  extremes based segregation index, for our economic data. through these methods, we can  uncover citywide multilevel spatial patterns of economic segregation realistically and comprehensively. using  beijing and wuhan as cases, we demonstrate and discuss the applicability and value of our method.  1.introduction  segregation refers to differences in the distributions of social groups  . researchers have examined many forms of  segregation, such as racial, occupational and economic segregation.  economic segregation, as one type of segregation, can be defined as the  spatial segregation of households by income or social class . specifically, the rich and poor are concentrated in different  neighbourhoods separated by spatial boundaries. in the context of urban  sprawl and decentralization, there is a common thought that economic  segregation is partly a product of growing social inequality, which can  lead to social unrest, an increase in crime, and a decrease in trust between groups in society .  therefore, a comprehensive and realistic investigation of citywide  spatial patterns of economic segregation is essential to the sustainable  development of a city .  scholars have conducted considerable research on segregation . part of this work concentrates on  people s residential spaces and assumes that people s daily activities  occur within these spaces . this assumption contributes significantly to understanding the experiences of different social  groups in static residential environments, although it seems deficient  when considering experiences of segregation outside residential environments . with the development of  human dynamics, there is a new call to extend the research scope to  address the possibility of interactions between people. this line of  research argues that in addition to residential places, people experience  segregation in other places where they undertake daily activities. to  address this idea, researchers have constructed individual activity  spaces to perform related studies and evaluate  segregation realistically and comprehensively . research based on individual activity   this work was supported by the national key research program of china under grant 2016yfb0501403 the national natural science foundation of china under  grant 41271399 and the china special fund for surveying, mapping and geoinformation research in the public interest under grant 201512015.   corresponding author at state key laboratory of information engineering in surveying, mapping and remote sensing, wuhan university, wuhan, china.  e mail address ydwang whu.edu.cn .  contents lists available at sciencedirect  cities  u zkw s yo kro 1ow o t o 1m y2w m k o2mt to  https doi.org 10.1016 j.cities.2020.103067  received 25 december 2019 received in revised form 20 august 2020 accepted 27 november 2020 cities 110 103067 2spaces illustrates the dynamics of individual trajectories and thus offers  a realistic measurement of segregation. however, existing studies have  two limitations in the comprehensive and realistic investigation of  citywide spatial patterns of economic segregation. first, studies usually  identify spatial patterns of segregation by aggregating groups of segregation values in traditional spaces, such as census blocks. this approach  falls short in evaluating the reality of the evaluation of segregation and  leads to the modifiable areal unit problem . second, studies that aim to measure citywide economic segregation usually rely on survey or census data, which are not updated  quickly enough and are difficult to obtain with regard to a wide range of  human trajectories.  this study addresses the two limitations above and aims to design an  alternative method for the comprehensive and realistic investigation of  citywide spatial patterns of economic segregation. our method consists  of two main parts. in the first part, we take advantage of human mobility  in spaces to define multilevel collective activity spaces as basic  analytical units. in this study, cass refer to urban spaces that are partitioned based on the mobility and clustering patterns of human activities in space. in the second part, we measure the segregation level of  each cas by designing a segregation index, called the term frequency  inverse document frequency index of concentration at the extremes  based segregation index, for a type of spatial economic data derived from the agglomerated economic activities of  groups. our method offers three contributions. first, both parts of our  method rely on bottom up data derived from human mobility or human  activities, thus supporting realistic investigation. second, our multilevel  results provide the possibility to investigate the segregation of a region  at different scales, thus supporting comprehensive investigation. third,  instead of an arbitrary division, our realistic and multilevel cass can  optimize the maup to a certain extent. using beijing and wuhan as  cases, we demonstrate the applicability and value of our method.  the remainder of this paper is organized as follows. in section 2, we  review related studies concerning the use of traditional spaces and individual activity spaces in segregation research. in section 3, we  describe the study areas and our datasets. in section 4, we introduce our  method and the spatial patterns of urban economic segregation in the  case studies. in section 5, we discuss the role of our methods in  achieving realistic and comprehensive results and the describe limitations of our methods. finally, the conclusions are drawn in section 6.  2.literature review  inspired by previous research efforts on segregation, we design an  alternative method for the comprehensive and realistic investigation of  citywide spatial patterns of economic segregation. in this section, we  review research related to two aspects measuring segregation based  on traditional spaces and measuring segregation based on individual  activity spaces.  2.1. segregation studies based on traditional spaces  most traditional studies on segregation have focused on the combination of residential spaces or administrative units and survey data or  census data, producing segregation studies based on traditional spaces.  these studies often use mathematical indices to measure certain characteristics of segregation, such as residential, racial, gender, occupation,  and income characteristics, in traditional spaces.  we reviewed some related studies, which we describe as follows.  based on census blocks and official census data, darden and kamel   revealed that black people were more residentially segregated  from white people in the suburbs than in cities. catney employed  data derived from the 2011 census of population of england and wales  to analyse small area ethnic residential segregation in england and  wales. the findings revealed that the results were highly dependent on  the cooperation of the scale and the selected measure of segregation. leckie and goldstein used annual school census data to analyse  the changing patterns of ethnic composition and segregation among  london secondary schools and found that these patterns remained  largely stable during the first decade of the 21st century. clark et al.   used census data and census block data from 2000 to 2010 for  los angeles to evaluate the patterns of race and ethnicity at varying  scales. they found decreasing segregation between black people and  white people and increasing segregation between asians and hispanics.  firebaugh and acciai utilized census data for all us metropolitan  areas in 1980 and 2010 and found that the neighbourhood poverty gap  between black people and white people declined substantially while the  residential segregation of black people remained very high. moreover,  chodrow used data from the five year estimates of the 2013  american community survey to model the structure and dynamics of  segregation based on modern information theory and machine learning.  in general, traditional methods evaluate segregation by focusing on  residential or official units complemented by survey or census data. this  stream of research has two features. first, it contributes greatly to understanding segregation in static residential environments, while it may  offer only partial or even biased results when considering human  mobility in shaping segregation experiences . second, it  can uncover the spatial patterns of segregation in residential or official  units, while it may produce biased results because of the maup   in determining the zoning schemes of these  units. to address these problems, researchers have proposed using a  series of individual activity spaces to obtain more comprehensive and  more realistic results.  2.2. segregation studies based on individual activity spaces  with the increasing attention to the role of human mobility in  shaping segregation experiences, a growing body of research argues that  segregation studies should be carried out based on individual activity  spaces . this kind  of research utilizes individual activity spaces as analytical units to  calculate segregation based on the characteristics of such spaces thus it  emphasizes the comprehensive influence of personal experiences and  realistic geographic contexts .  we reviewed several related studies. osth et al. combined  spatial trajectory data with detailed socio economic residential statistics  to study how spatial mobility can shape the segregation experiences of  people and change the segregation levels of places. by using patterns of  daily travel behaviour and decomposing the social interaction potential   metric into interactions within and between social groups, farber  et al. explored spatial variations in segregation and hotspots of  segregation. wang et al. examined the activity spaces of residents  from different types of neighbourhoods and found significant differences  in the extensity, intensity, and exclusivity of activity spaces. tan et al.   examined the effects of ethnicity on people s spatiotemporal  behaviours in the chinese context and concluded that the ethnic characteristics of hui minorities had a greater independent and significant  influence on spatiotemporal behaviour than did the characteristics of  han majorities in xining. park and kwan proposed a new dynamic notion of segregation that included segregation in various  spatiotemporal contexts in people s everyday lives. considering movements among social groups throughout the day, le roux et al.  observed that social segregation within the paris region decreased  during the day and that the upper class group remained the most  segregated at night. zhang et al. used a 7 day individual global  position system tracking dataset, activity diary data and socio  economic attribute data to reveal that the characteristics of segregation varied not only with respect to actual activity spaces and potential  activity spaces but also between different days of the week. based on  urban human interaction patterns, shen successfully measured  the extent to which two trajectories interacted with one another in daily  activity spaces and captured the interaction potentials among various m. qiao et al. cities 110 103067 3social groups. to recognize and assess segregation as a dynamic process,  li and wang proposed a regression estimator that measured  segregation by assessing the similarity between people and the social  environments that they experienced in their daily activity spaces.  in general, this stream of research holds that segregation exists not  only in individual residential spaces but also in individual activity  spaces. these studies have three features. first, when taking an individual s experience and realistic geographic contexts into account, the  evaluation of segregation becomes more comprehensive and more  realistic. second, the results obtained by research using this kind of  method are at the individual level, which is valuable for the comprehensive measurement of segregation. in regard to revealing spatial  patterns, studies usually aggregate individual level results into traditional spatial units, which are subject to the maup . third,  individual trajectory data used in this type of research are generally  from surveys, which are randomly sampled and have lower biases.  however, difficulties arise when a large sample and a large spatial range  of data are required to reveal citywide spatial patterns of segregation,  especially in relation to the economic statuses of individuals.  by considering the advantages and disadvantages of existing  methods, this study proposes an alternative method of constructing  realistic and multilevel cass as analytical units and using bottom up  human economic activity data as a realistic indicator of the economic  level of a region to comprehensively and realistically reveal citywide  spatial patterns of economic segregation. multilevel cass can optimize  the maup to a certain extent. the use of bottom up human economic  activity data can address the problems of generating only partial or even  biased results when using static census data. the spatial economic data  used in our study come from the agglomerated economic activities of  groups. while these data do not reach the individual trajectory level,  they are accessible and able to meet our needs in revealing spatial patterns of segregation. we describe the details and applications of our  method below.  3.study area and data preparation  this study uses two metropolises beijing and wuhan, which have  different geographic characteristics and urban morphology patterns, as  cases to verify the applicability and robustness of this study. beijing, the  capital of china, covers an area of 16,410.54 km2 and has a population  of 21.542 million people. developed ring roads are a typical characteristic of this city and play a major role in shaping the urban formation  of beijing. the urban planning of beijing is mainly based on these ring  roads. people living in beijing have a consensus that in locations closer  to the central ring road, transportation is more convenient and the  economy is more developed. therefore, we believe that beijing is a  typical city whose development is greatly promoted by transportation.  wuhan is an essential central city in central china, with an area of  8494.41 km2 and a population of 11.081 million people. wuhan has a  unique landform in that the water area accounts for a quarter of the  city s total area. the yangtze river and its largest tributary, the han  river, intersect in the city, forming a pattern of three towns in wuhan   separated by rivers. there are also  numerous lakes embedded in this city. based on this unique landscape,  the urban planning of wuhan depends greatly on the rivers and lakes.  thus, people living in wuhan consider that areas around these rivers and  lakes are more likely to be developed effectively. therefore, we believe  that wuhan is a typical city whose development is greatly promoted by  landforms. both of these metropolises have attracted people of various  social strata, such as business owners, white collar workers, institutional  workers, low skilled workers, and residents, to work and live in these  cities. these people carry out various activities with characteristics of  different social strata, thus providing a large amount of valuable data as  the basis for investigating the spatial patterns of urban economic  segregation.  in our method, the implementation of the division of analytical units and the measurement of segregation emphasize the use of data relating  to human activities to enhance the reality of the results. the development of information and communication technology provides unprecedented possibilities to extract human activity data. in our study, we use  sina weibo, a twitter like microblogging site widely used in china, to  gather human mobility data for the division of analytical units. dianping, a popular website on which users comment on and grade commercial facilities, provides spatial economic data to measure the  economic segregation level of a city. dianping data, including geolocations, per capita consumption information and other detailed  descriptions of shops, can provide clues to the economic level of a region  according to pcc information derived from averaging the amount spent  during consumers activities in a shop. in this paper, shops include all  the commercial facilities uploaded onto the dianping website within a  city.  by building a data crawler frame based on the application programming interfaces provided by sina weibo, we collected  abundant social media data with embedded geolocation information.  these data came from the real time voluntary release of users during the  period of data collection. to ensure the validity of the data, we removed  the data collected from advertising accounts, marketing accounts, virtual person accounts, and users with fewer than three messages posted  during our collection period. the items used in our study that are  embedded in sina weibo data include the id of the data, geographic  coordinates, date, time, and id of the user posting the data. table 1  shows detailed descriptions of the valid datasets.  we crawled dianping data via webpage parsing because of the  absence of dianping apis. to ensure the validity of the data, we removed  data without pcc information. the id, geographic coordinates, grade,  and pcc information were attached to each shop. table 1 provides  detailed descriptions of the valid datasets. dianping data are poi like  data with economic characteristics. the generation of shops on dianping is not in real time, which is in line with the reality that the existence of a shop will not change in a short time. thus, once we completed  data collection, we could obtain the information of all the uploaded  shops of a city on dianping as of our collection period.  to understand the spatial distribution of the data, we estimated the  kernel density value of the weibo data and dianping data on fixed cells  because of data anonymization. we averaged the hourly amount of  weibo data on weekdays and weekends to analyse the temporal patterns  of these weibo data. because the generation of shops on dianping is not  in real time, the temporal analysis of dianping is missing in our study. to  better understand the dianping data, we counted the frequency distribution of the pcc of the dianping data. considering that dianping data  mainly apply inside the sixth ring roads of beijing and the belt  expressway of wuhan, the study areas of these two cases focus on these  areas.  fig. 1 shows the spatial distribution of the weibo data and dianping  data in beijing. we used the default classification method, the natural  breaks , provided by arcgis to classify the value of the kernel  density estimation into five classes in order to enhance the differences  between different regions. as one might expect, the downtown area  contains more weibo and dianping data, while areas within the fifth  ring road and sixth ring road have fewer data. furthermore, the  northern and eastern parts have more weibo data and dianping data  than do the southern and western parts.  fig. 2 shows the spatial distributions of the weibo data and dianping  data in wuhan. it is evident that areas along the yangtze river are significant data gathering places, and the data spread outward from both  sides of the yangtze river. interestingly, the northwest side of the  yangtze river has fewer weibo data but more dianping data compared  to the southeast side of the yangtze river. these characteristics of the  two cases are the basis for our investigation of the spatial patterns of  urban economic segregation.  the temporal variation of the weibo data on weekdays and weekends is shown in fig. 3. the two temporal patterns of weibo data in m. qiao et al. cities 110 103067 4beijing and wuhan are highly consistent, which indicates that the  temporal patterns of group activities are stable. moreover, we summarized two characteristics by comparing the temporal patterns between  weekdays and weekends. first, most of the time, except between 6 am  and 9 am, people have more weibo activities on weekends than on  workdays. second, the morning peak of people s activities on weekends  is approximately 1 2 h behind that on workdays. these two characteristics are consistent with the actual patterns of human activities,  whereby people have more time to carry out activities and are more  likely to wake up later on weekends than on weekdays. therefore, our  weibo data in both beijing and wuhan include reasonable human activities, which is the basis for our study.  the frequency distribution of the pcc of dianping data is shown in  fig. 4. we carried out statistical analysis on both all dianping data and  several types of dianping data that were randomly selected. there is a  long tail in these frequency distributions and we can fit them well by  power law functions. this indicates the existence of the gap between  rich and poor, which encourages us to investigate the patterns of economic segregation.  4.comprehensive and realistic investigation of citywide spatial  patterns of economic segregation  in this study, we suggest that the comprehensive and realistic  investigation of citywide spatial patterns of economic segregation can be  achieved based on the combination of multilevel cass and spatial economic data obtained from human activities, which aligns the results  with the realistic development of a city. to implement this approach, we  propose an alternative method that includes two parts. the first part  focuses on dividing multilevel cass in a bottom up and realistic way by  applying community detection algorithms to improved human activity  networks obtained from weibo data with embedded geographic coordinates. the second part designs a segregation index, named the  tfidf ice based segregation index, for dianping data embedded pcc  information that represents the average amount spent during consumers activities in a shop to measure economic segregation. finally, by  using beijing and wuhan as cases, we reveal the realistic and comprehensive spatial patterns of urban economic segregation in these two  cities and demonstrate the applicability of our method.  4.1. dividing multilevel cass based on human mobility  the first part of our method focuses on generating multilevel cass as  the spatial analytical units in a bottom up and realistic way. for this  purpose, we regard people s mobility flows as proxies to connect  discrete places into cohesive units, which are called cass in our paper  . the principle behind making the cass multilevel is  the hierarchy of human mobility patterns, which further reinforces the  role of realistic human mobility in dividing analytical units. both tang  et al. and qiao et al. proved that there are two levels of  human mobility patterns long distance mobility and short distance  mobility. therefore, on the premise that our cass follow the reality  and reasonability of human mobility patterns, we divide people s  mobility flows into long distance flows and short distance flows to finally connect discrete places into two level cass.  technically, the combination of network analysis and spatial analysis makes it possible to convert human mobility  flows into two level cass. the principle of this combination is that  places near each other in geographic space have more connections in  network space and are therefore more likely aggregated into a cas  within geographic space. based on this principle, using human mobility  flows obtained from weibo data to construct networks, we employ the  method of partitioning urban spaces proposed by qiao et al. .  there are two steps to realize this partitioning. the first aims to find the  hierarchy of human mobility patterns to determine the basis for two  level partitioning, and the second focuses on improving the construction of networks and detecting communities to realize the partitioning of  two level cass. the diagram in fig. 5 shows the operational details.  the results of two level cass reveal the bottom up division and use  of urban spaces, which are realistic spatial analytical units and  contribute significantly to addressing the maup, i.e., the non arbitrary  division can mitigate the zoning effect of maup, and the multi scale  units with realistic attributes can mitigate the scale effect of maup.  the hierarchical characteristics of cass provide the ability to measure  segregation at different levels, which contributes to a comprehensive  evaluation of segregation. to evaluate the economic statuses of these  areas in a realistic way, we continue to consider the role of human activities in the measurement of economic segregation levels.  4.2. tailoring a segregation index for spatial economic activity data  the partitioning of the two level cass emphasizes the realistic ways  in which people use spaces. by using these cass as basic analytical units,  we further emphasize the reality of the measurement of economic  segregation based on human economic activities. dianping, a popular  website on which users comment on and grade shops, provides sufficient  pcc information derived from averaging the amount spent during  consumers activities in each shop to support this approach. despite to  the validity and abundance of the data, there are some challenges in  measuring segregation using traditional segregation indices for dianping data, especially the challenge posed by its multi type nature  . therefore, tailoring a segregation index  for data such as those from dianping data is needed. in our study, we  design a segregation index, named the tfidf ice based segregation  index, by using the term frequency inverse document frequency   to  weight the index of concentration at the extremes .  ice is a new type of index that reflects the extent of segregation as the  level to which a cas s economic level is concentrated into extremes of  deprivation or privilege. eq. shows the conventional calculation of  the ice in the context of this paper.  ice xshops with pcc p yshops with pcc d  total tshops with pcc data  here, p and d indicate the thresholds of the pcc values used to  classify shops with high and low consumption levels, respectively x and  y represent the number of shops with economic privilege and economic table 1  description of datasets.  data city  beijing wuhan  weibo date 2014.02.01 2014.09.30 date 2017.07.01 2019.05.31  amount 9,015,051 amount 3,455,557  dianping date 2018.06 date 2019.06  amount 75,776 amount 43,391  category 111 category 94 m. qiao et al. cities 110 103067 5deprivation, respectively and t is the total number of shops. based on  the conventional definition, there is a symmetry in the value of ice, and  it ranges from 1 to 1. when ice 0, there is an absolute balance between the rich and the poor when ice approaches 1, it indicates extreme  privilege and when ice approaches 1, it indicates extreme  deprivation.  regarding the conventional calculation of the ice in eq. , challenges occur because the calculation is not entirely applicable to this study when we consider the multi type nature of the dianping shop  categories. to manage these challenges, we combine tfidf with ice to  generate the tfidf ice based segregation index. since the mathematical foundations for the choice of index are valuable weibo data  dianping datafig. 1.kernel density distributions of the experimental data from beijing.   weibo data  dianping data fig. 2.kernel density distributions of the experimental data from wuhan. m. qiao et al. cities 110 103067 62019 , we add a mathematical and practical description of the significance of the tfidf in our index in si appendix. our main text focuses on  the description of its calculation as follows.   the challenge of unequal contribution.  there are two problems arising from unequal contribution. first,  data that are within the same category but located in different cass have  unequal contributions to the assessment of the segregation of each cas.  second, data located in the same cas but belonging to different categories have unequal contributions to the assessment of the segregation  of this cas. to resolve the challenges associated with the unequal  contributions described above, our study introduces the tfidf . the tfidf is a weighting factor that is often used in information retrieval and text mining to evaluate the importance of a word to  a document in a corpus. the essence of the tfidf is that the importance  of a word correlates positively with the frequency with which the word  appears in a document but correlates negatively with the number of  documents that contain the word. this essence is consistent with the  principle of segregation evaluation, indicating that the rarity of a category corresponds to a more significant impact of the category on  segregation. therefore, by employing the tfidf, the word, document,  and corpus in the field of information retrieval are replaced with the category, cas, and collection for all cass, respectively, in our study. eq.   shows the tfidf calculation in our study.       tfij nij ni idf j lg s sj  tfidf ij tfij idf j  here, ni represents the total number of dianping shops in cas i nij  represents the number of dianping shops belonging to category j in cas  i s refers to the total number of all cass sj refers to the total number  of cass that include dianping shops belonging to j tfij indicates the  frequency of dianping shops belonging to category j in cas i and idfj  indicates the weight of cass with dianping shops belonging to category  j, which is inversely correlated with the frequency of cass with shops  belonging to category j relative to all cass.   the challenge of significant deviations in the number of shops.  significant deviations exist among the number of shops in different  cass and among the number of shops belonging to different categories,  which will cause a significant deviation of the denominator in eq.   beijing  wuhanfig. 3.temporal variation of the weibo data on weekdays and weekends. m. qiao et al. cities 110 103067 7and further affect the ice values of different categories. to mitigate the  influences of the significant deviation among the number of shops in  different cass, we take the total number of shops belonging to a category as the denominator in the calculation of segregation. furthermore,  we take the logarithm of the denominator in eq. to mitigate the  significant deviation among the number of shops belonging to different categories.   the challenge of deviation in pccs.  the pccs among different categories vary greatly thus, each category should have an exclusive p and d instead of an arbitrary value     fig. 4.frequency distribution of pcc of dianping data. show the distribution in beijing and show the distribution in wuhan. m. qiao et al. cities 110 103067 8 barthelemy, 2016 . we address this challenge by calculating quintiles  to determine the exclusive p and d for each category, which is inspired  by the 80 20 principle . the  80 20 principle states that approximately 80 of wealth is concentrated  in approximately 20 of a population. based on this principle, the frequency distribution of the pcc of dianping data is a power law distribution, which indicates that we can regard the first quantile of the  quintiles as the threshold of p to classify shops with high consumption  levels. to follow the symmetry in the conventional calculation of ice in  eq. , we define the last quantile of the quintiles as the threshold of d  to classify shops with low consumption levels. the calculation of the  segregation value derived from the shops belonging to category j in cas i  is as shown in eq. .  ice ij  xijshops with pcc pj    yijshops with pcc dj  lgn j tfidf ij   here, xij and yij represent the number of shops belonging to category j  in cas i with economic privilege and with economic deprivation,  respectively nj denotes the total number of shops belonging to category  j and the values of pj and dj correspond to the highest and lowest  quintiles, respectively, with the quintiles obtained by dividing the  number of shops belonging to category j into five groups of equal size.   the challenge of integrating a set of segregations.  the integration of a set of segregation values derived from data  belonging to different categories is needed when evaluating the overall  segregation level of a cas. after weighting the segregation derived from  category j in cas i by the tfidf value described above, we consider the  mean operation by which to integrate the segregation values belonging  to the same cas. in addition, there is a situation in which both positive  values indicating economic advantages and negative values indicating  economic disadvantages coexist in the set of segregation values in each  cas. the proportions of positive and negative values should also be  taken into account otherwise, the sizes of the values will be the only  determinant of the degree of segregation. finally, we complete the  construction of the tfidf ice based segregation index, as shown in eq.  . ice i pi  jcice ijf0ice ij qi  jcice ijd0ice ij mi  here, pi and qi denote the numbers of positive and negative values of  iceij, respectively, and mi represents the number of categories contained  in cas i.  thus far, we have completed the construction of our tfidf ice  based segregation index. this index is tailored for dianping data,  which involve complex and diverse characteristics that pose several  challenges for calculating segregation levels. in addition, this index  makes it possible to calculate segregation based on multi type data as  well. by applying the tfidf ice based segregation index to the combination of dianping data and two level cass, we can perform a  comprehensive and realistic investigation of citywide spatial patterns of  economic segregation.  4.3. spatial patterns of urban economic segregation  by calculating the tfidf ice based segregation index using the pccs  of dianping shops, we obtain the segregation values of the two level  cass. to reveal the spatial patterns of urban economic segregation,  we stratify the values of segregation by quintiles and then map them to  the geographic space. the cass with the highest quintile represent areas  with concentrated economic privilege, while cass with the lowest  quintile represent areas with concentrated economic deprivation. to  evaluate the results, we collected and marked some high grade residential and urban villages from the survey. we used the id rank format  to label each cas, where id represents the index of a cas and rank  represents the rank of the ice value of a cas. figs. 6 7 and tables s1 s2  in the si appendix show the details of the results in the two cases.  4.3.1. spatial patterns of urban economic segregation in beijing  in general, beijing shows an asymmetric spatial distribution pattern  of economic segregation, as revealed in fig. 6. although the layout of  beijing is symmetrical around the city centre, the development of the  regional economy is not symmetrical around the city centre. taking the  forbidden city as the centre of symmetry, the eastern part of beijing is  more luxurious than the western part, and the northern part is more  luxurious than the southern part. since antiquity, an adage in beijing has  fig. 5.diagram of the method of two level cas partitioning. m. qiao et al. cities 110 103067 9stated that the east is luxurious, the west is noble, the south is impoverished, and the north is humble the real development pattern is  generally but not exactly consistent with this adage. the details of the  investigation are described below.   the east is luxurious. in antiquity, the east was a gathering place for  many supplies and granaries and was where wealthy businesspersons  settled. because of the developed transportation infrastructure since then, this area evolved and today includes various office buildings,  entertainment venues, and shopping centres, such as the famous  trading area of sanlitun in t cas 1 and the beijing  workers stadium in s cas 2, making it the wealthiest  area.   the west is noble. in antiquity, the west was a gathering place for  princes and prime ministers, including sites such as prince gong s  mansion and prince chun s mansion. currently, it is a place that   top level spatial patterns of beijing economic segregation  sublevel spatial patterns of beijing economic segregation.fig. 6.two level spatial patterns of beijing economic segregation. the locations of famous high grade residential and urban villages are labelled.   top level spatial patterns of wuhan economic segregation.   sublevel spatial patterns of wuhan economic segregation.fig. 7.two level spatial patterns of wuhan economic segregation. the locations of famous high grade residential areas are labelled. m. qiao et al. cities 110 103067 10gathers state owned enterprises and dignitaries and officials, who  live a modest and comfortable life.   the south is impoverished. in antiquity, the south was the place of  residence of working people and folk artists, and the south exhibited  poor development. there are fewer traffic facilities in this region  than in the north therefore, the flows of material and the development of areas have been less promoted.   the north is humble. in antiquity, the north was the place of residence for people who served the aristocracy. historically, traffic  conditions were poor and impeded the development of this region.  however, changes recently occurred due to preparation for the beijing 2008 olympic games. the beijing olympic park and the wangjing plate areas along  the north fourth ring road were recently developed. in addition, s  cas 54, which is dominated by both the summer palace and yuquan  mountains, is surrounded by many villas along the north fifth ring  road and represents a habitable area for the rich. since the beijing  2008 olympic games, the development of the north has dramatically  improved. this region has attracted the settlement of many wealthy  people therefore, the north is no longer humble but is well developed and prosperous.  in short, our method can reveal the realistic spatial patterns of economic segregation in beijing. in addition to the details of the investigation described above, we can recognize the role of transportation in  promoting urban development in beijing. specifically, traffic in the  south is not as well managed as that in the north, making its economic  development slower than the north s the closer to the central ring road,  the more convenient the transportation and the more developed the  economy. in addition, the airport greatly promotes the economy of areas  along the route to beijing capital international airport. these findings  can provide implications for cities in which transportation has a great  effect on promoting economic development.  4.3.2. spatial patterns of urban economic segregation in wuhan  the spatial patterns of wuhan s economic segregation show a strong  dependence on the layout of rivers and lakes. taking the yangtze river  as the main axis and taking the han river as the secondary axis, the  spatial patterns of wuhan s economic segregation show a cross structure, which is consistent with the urban master plan of wuhan 2017  2035 . the details of the investigation are as follows.   the spatial patterns of wuhan s economic segregation along the  yangtze river. in general, areas along the yangtze river have high  concentrations of economic privilege. in particular, the old hankou  district , areas around dong lake and the new ecological town sixin are areas with concentrated economic privilege. there is a  consensus in wuhan that having a river view house or a lake view  house is a symbol of wealth. for example, s cas 20 consists of the  most famous houses with views of the river, including wuhan  tiandiyunting and wuhan tiandiyujiangyuan. the s cas 3 has  many expensive lake view houses around the northwest lake.  similarly, many famous lake view houses and private villas, such as  shijijiangshang and donghutianyue, are around dong lake. these  luxurious houses attract many high grade facilities that lead to  concentrated economic privilege. in addition, according to umpw,  sixin is planned to become a nationally important exhibition centre.  it has successfully attracted many advanced facilities over the past  decade, which has led to the concentration of economic privilege.   the spatial patterns of wuhan s economic segregation of areas along  the han river to the guanggu sub district. in addition to the old  hankou districts and areas around dong lake, the guanggu sub  district and areas around yanxi lake are areas of concentrated economic privilege. as  a high tech industrial zone and with the inclusion of ma anshan forest park, guanggu is a vibrant area for business executives and  high level managers. in addition, with the pleasant living and  ecological environmental advantages of yanxi lake, s cas 56 gradually attracts the rich.   the spatial patterns of wuhan s economic segregation of areas of  concentrated economic deprivation. urban villages in wuhan have  been rebuilt or are in the process of being rebuilt. in this case, suburbs and universities have become areas with concentrated economic  deprivation. universities with extensive coverage areas mainly  attract students without jobs or income, and as a result, these areas  contain shops with low pccs and are areas of economic deprivation.  for example, due to the cluster of universities, our results show that  the planned gedihu business residential area  and planned qingshan business area manifest as areas of concentrated economic deprivation. in addition, areas  around tangxun lake  are gathering areas for the rich, but clustered university towns in  these areas have weakened their economic advantages. although the  development in these areas is up and coming, many poor facilities  are located around the university town in these areas, which places  them at an economic disadvantage.  in short, our method is applicable to evaluating the realistic spatial  patterns of economic segregation in wuhan. in addition to the details of  the investigation described above, the role of landforms in promoting  urban development in wuhan is obvious, such as the wealthy areas  along the yangtze river and han river and near dong lake and  northwest lake. these findings can provide implications for cities in  which landforms greatly promote economic development.  in summary, we can identify some characteristics in these areas of  concentrated economic status.   the spatial patterns of areas of concentrated economic privilege.  areas with better humanistic environments, such as areas near  downtown areas, important traffic stations, and commercial centres, and  areas with better natural environments, such as areas near lakes, are  more likely to have surrounding high grade residences and show  concentrated economic privilege. for example, the downtown areas  including the dongcheng and xicheng districts in beijing and the old  hankou district in wuhan show concentrated economic privilege. beijing capital international airport and the special economic zone of the  beijing capital international airport contained in areas corresponding to  t cas 27 and s cas 22 show concentrated economic privilege, as shown  in fig. 6. the location of the hankou railway station in s cas 14 in fig. 7  shows concentrated economic privilege. most of the areas around rivers  and lakes in fig. 7 show concentrated economic privilege.   spatial distribution of areas of economic deprivation.  areas of economic deprivation are mainly located in suburbs, university areas, and urban villages. for example, t cas 22, 26, and 29 in  fig. 6 and s cas 23, 41, and 48 in fig. 7 belong to suburban districts t  cas 2 and 3 in fig. 6 are the major locations of peking university and  tsinghua university s cas 1 in fig. 7 is the major location of central  china normal university and huazhong university of science and  technology and t cas 24 in fig. 6 is the area of yangqiao village and  guoyuan village .  in conclusion, we have demonstrated the applicability of our method  and verified the reasonability of the case study results in this section.  below, we discuss some details of the findings.  5.discussion  the spatial patterns of urban economic segregation obtained by our  method can reveal the economic statuses of areas in a bottom up and m. qiao et al. cities 110 103067 11realistic way. to further explore the effectiveness and value of our results, we discuss the role of our methods in achieving realistic and  comprehensive results. our study has several limitations, and we will  discuss them in this section as well.  5.1. discussion of the role of our methods in achieving realistic results  this paper proposes an alternative method by which to uncover  realistic spatial patterns of urban economic segregation based on a  combination of realistic cass and spatial economic data obtained from  human activities. to prove the effectiveness of this combination in  providing realistic results, we use beijing as a case to compare our results with two conventional spatial patterns of urban economic segregation. in detail, to demonstrate the effectiveness of our cass in  achieving realistic results, we compare our results to results obtained by  the combination of census blocks and dianping data, as shown in fig. 8  . to prove the effectiveness of dianping data in achieving realistic  results, we compare our results to results obtained by the combination of  sublevel cass and house price data, as shown in fig. 8.  overall, the spatial patterns of urban economic segregation shown in  fig. 8 are consistent with those in fig. 6, which means that the  tfidf ice based index is practical even over conventional spaces  nevertheless, the details reveal several inaccuracies. by analysing figs. 6   and 8, we disclose three disadvantages of using census blocks as  basic spatial analytical units compared to using cass. first, some areas  with concentrated economic statuses remain undiscovered. for  example, the area labelled by ellipse 1 in fig. 8 corresponds to an area  dominated by the summer palace and yuquan mountains, which we  have identified as an area of concentrated economic privilege. second,  inaccurate results inevitably occur regarding enclaves, such as the areas  labelled by ellipse 2 in fig. 8. third, biases may occur when a bustling  street is the shared boundary of two census blocks. for example, ellipse 3  and ellipse 4 designate the area of the zhongguancun military civilian  integration industrial park and the area of beijing capital international airport and the special economic zone of beijing capital international airport, respectively. businesses on both sides of the shared  boundary of the census blocks are flourishing, which means that biases  may emerge when evaluating the economic statuses of areas based on  census blocks.  compared to the dynamic agglomerated economic data obtained  from human activities, we regard house price data as a type of static  indicator of economic status. in the current study, we collected 392,054  house price records from fang , a popular real estate trading  platform. fig. 8 shows the results obtained based on the combination  of cass and house price data. compared to fig. 6, we can reveal two  disadvantages of using static indicators of economic status. first, this  method cannot uncover fine grained segregation patterns. the overall  level of housing prices in a region depends mainly on location. downtown areas and historical spots, such as the area of the summer palace  labelled by ellipse 1, are more likely to have concentrated economic  privilege. however, the classification is not without errors. for example,  the area labelled by ellipse 2 is a gathering place of quadrangle dwellings that have high house prices and poor facilities. wangjing and the  beijing olympic park are labelled by ellipse 3, which have lower house  prices than do the downtown areas but also have excellent facilities for  the rich. second, the estimation of villas is inaccurate. the unit price of a  villa is lower than that of a residence in the downtown area, which does  not mean that the economic statuses of the people living in villas are not  as high as those of the people living downtown.  in short, the combination of cass and spatial economic data obtained from human activities contributes to a more realistic evaluation  of spatial patterns of urban economic segregation.   census blocks and dianping data   cass and house price datafig. 8.the advantage of the cass and actual economic data obtained from  human activities. shows the spatial patterns of urban economic segregation  measured by the combination of census blocks and dianping data. shows the  spatial patterns of urban economic segregation measured by the combination of  sub level cass and house price data. the black ellipses with labels are examples  of several inaccuracies. m. qiao et al. cities 110 103067 125.2. discussion of the role of our methods in achieving comprehensive  results  the combined examination of our multilevel results provides a  comprehensive evaluation of the patterns of economic segregation. as  determined by the reality and hierarchy of human mobility patterns, we  have revealed two level results in our cases, which contribute to a  comprehensive evaluation of the spatial patterns of urban economic  segregation. the top level results reveal the patterns from a macroscopic  perspective, while the sublevel results reveal the patterns from a  microscopic perspective. for example, from the macroscopic perspective, areas along the route to beijing capital international airport show  concentrated economic privilege. from the microscopic perspective, s  cas 59, 74, and 70 in fig. 6 are removed from wealthy areas and  have become slightly wealthy or medium level economic areas. in fact,  several villages mainly dominate these areas. the top level results are  the combination of t cas 9 and t cas 27 in fig. 6, which are dominated by the wangjing business circle and the special economic zone of  the beijing capital international airport, respectively. influenced by the  development of the business circle and the airport s special economic  zone, the economic statuses of these areas are not poor but are weaker  than those of the business circle and the airport s special economic zone.  therefore, by using two level cass, the economic segregation level of an  area can be evaluated comprehensively by considering economic positions in both the top level cas and sublevel cas.  5.3. limitations of our methods in uncovering spatial patterns of  economic segregation  we demonstrate the applicability of our method in the cases of beijing and wuhan nevertheless, we should discuss some limitations  associated with our method. the pccs of dianping shops that mostly  represent the levels of commercial facilities are one of the major contributors to our method, and they can reflect the development level of  the region to a certain extent but not completely. thus, our results  display some deviation. we have summarized five limitations of our  results below.  first, inaccurate results may exist in areas with a low diversity of  land use types. for example, t cas 46 in fig. 6 is a tourist area that is the  dominant location of the fragrant hills and beijing botanical garden.  because this area is slightly distant from downtown, major commercial  facilities are gathered within the tourist area and have slightly higher  prices than normal, which causes the economic level in this area to be  overestimated.  second, most, but not all, commercial facilities have uploaded their  information to the dianping platform. shops that are more popular and  located in urban areas are more likely to join the dianping platform,  while information for shops located in rural areas, such as villages situated far from cities, may be lost. therefore, we take dianping data as a  sample dataset to investigate the economic segregation patterns of  urban areas based on realistic human consumption information however, these data may not be applicable to rural areas for which dianping  data are lacked.  third, the realistic economic statuses of some areas, such as the  haidian and chaoyang districts in our study, may be inconsistent with  our results because of differences in economic structures. according to  the beijing bureau of statistics, the annual per capita gross domestic  production of the chaoyang district was higher than that of the  haidian district, but it has become lower by comparison in several  recent years. our two level results visually show that economic privilege  in the chaoyang district is more concentrated than that in the haidian  district. by investigating the economic structures of these two districts,  we note that the chaoyang district has a commercial and trade economic  structure, while education and high tech industries dominate the economic structure of the haidian district. the economic structure of  chaoyang district is closely related to people s daily lives, while haidian district is more suitable for people to work. therefore, based on human  activity data, the results obtained by our method emphasize the investigation of the comprehensive quality of commercial facilities and  human life, which is useful and valuable for reducing urban segregation  and assisting in sustainable city development.  fourth, our study has a limitation in revealing refined temporal  patterns of segregation because the generation and updating of shops on  dianping is not in real time. specifically, although different customers of  a shop spend different amounts, the pcc of the shop generally does not  change because a shop targets a consumer group at the same consumption level. therefore, our current research can focus only on the  spatial patterns of segregation.  fifth, social media data are not a random sample, which means some  kinds of biases such as demographic biases exist in social media data and  these biases are difficult to mitigate .  for example, yuan et al. found that the senior population in china is systematically underrepresented on  weibo. nevertheless, these data still provide valuable insights in urban  studies .  in general, our method shows advantages in the comprehensive and  realistic investigation of citywide spatial patterns of economic segregation. in addition, there are some limitations to be addressed in the  future.  6.conclusions  a comprehensive and realistic investigation of citywide spatial patterns of economic segregation has important implications for the  configuration of cities and urban planning. our study contributes to this  emerging body of research by proposing an alternative method based on  the reality of human mobility and human activities. we first define  multilevel cass as basic spatial analytical units by analysing the hierarchical patterns of human activity mobility. this approach provides  analytical units that follow the reality and comprehensiveness of human  mobility and mitigate the maup to a certain extent. based on these  cass, we tailor the tfidf ice based segregation index for human economic activity data, which are dianping data, to measure the degree of  economic segregation. the measurement relies on data generated from  human economic activities, which further embodies the consideration of  the reality of human activity. by using this method, we can ultimately  perform a realistic and comprehensive evaluation of citywide economic  segregation.  in the cases of beijing and wuhan, by analysing the reliability of our  experimental results, we proved the applicability and value of our  method in the comprehensive and realistic investigation of citywide  spatial patterns of economic segregation. in the case of beijing, taking  the forbidden city as the centre of symmetry, we have revealed that the  eastern part of beijing is richer than the western part, while the northern  part is richer than the southern part. this case demonstrated the applicability of our research in cities with a development mode promoted by  transportation. in the case of wuhan, taking the yangtze river as the  central axis and the han river as the secondary axis, the spatial patterns  of economic segregation show a cross structure. this case demonstrated the applicability of our research in cities with a development  mode affected by landforms. moreover, the common patterns of these  two cases show that areas near downtown, important traffic stations,  commercial centres, and areas with extensive natural environments  show concentrated economic privilege and are usually surrounded by  high grade residential areas. areas of economic deprivation are mainly  located in suburbs, university areas, and urban villages. these common  patterns further proved the robustness of our method.  by comparison with census blocks and house price data, we discussed  the advantages of using cass and spatial economic data obtained from  human activities in making the evaluation more realistic. we also discussed the function of multiple levels in making the evaluation of urban  economic segregation more comprehensive. moreover, we discussed the m. qiao et al. cities 110 103067 13limitations of our methods. biases exist in the evaluation of some areas,  such as rural areas where dianping data are lacking, areas with an  economic structure mainly consisting of non commercial activities, and  areas that typically have a low diversity of land use types. an additional  limitation of our study is related to revealing refined temporal patterns  of segregation because the generation and updating of shops on dianping is not in real time.  the main finding in this article reminds us that examining the reality  of human activity can help to identify the realistic spatial patterns of  economic segregation. the facilities are the link that connects human  activity and the spatial patterns of economic segregation. if a place is  equipped with enough high end facilities, the rich will come to settle  down to enjoy the amenities, such as in areas with business districts and  high grade residences. in contrast, people with low budgets will gather  in areas with poor facilities, such as in areas with university towns.  furthermore, areas with the same economic level tend to congregate  into larger areas, as shown in figs. 6 7 and table s1 s2, which in turn  aggravates the economic segregation of the city. to embrace the findings  of this study, we suggest reducing agglomeration of areas at the same  economic level and considering the combination of areas at low and high  economic levels to reduce economic segregation. specifically, planning  a business district or a scenic area in a university town will promote  economic development in the university town, which is valuable to  reducing economic segregation.  in conclusion, the multilevel results obtained by our method present  a comprehensive and realistic investigation of citywide spatial patterns  of economic segregation. despite its drawbacks, the method we propose  is effective, and the replicability and open source features of our study  demonstrate its great value and implications for the official management  and sustainable development of cities. in future research, we will  consider more factors, such as the population, differences in the economic structures of different areas, mixtures of land use types, and vitality of commercial facilities, in this method.  credit authorship contribution statement  mengling qiao conceptualization, methodology, writing original  draft, data curation, validation, investigation. yandong wang  conceptualization, writing review editing, funding acquisition.  shanmei wu software, data curation, investigation. xiaokang fu  conceptualization. yanyan gu data curation. mingxuan dou  conceptualization.  declaration of competing interest  we have no conflicts of interest to disclose.  appendix a.supplementary data  supplementary data to this article can be found online at https doi.  org 10.1016 j.cities.2020.103067 .  references