article urban studies 2023, vol. 60 734 751  c211urban studies journal limited 2022 article reuse guidelines  sagepub.com journals permissions doi 10.1177 00420980221119385journals.sagepub.com home usj the dynamics of socio economic segregation what role do private schools play  stefanie ja hnen wzb berlin social science center, germany marcel helbig wzb berlin social science center, germany abstract although residential sorting along socio economic lines has increased in many cities across europe, few studies have examined what drives changes in segregation over time. this studylooks at the role of school choice expansion in shaping patterns of spatial inequality. we adopt a longitudinal perspective and investigate how the increasing availability of private primary schools is related to the dynamics of socio economic segregation in german cities. drawing on a uniquelycompiled data set for the years 2005 to 2014 that includes 74 large and medium sized cities with over 3500 districts, we estimate linear panel regression models with city fixed effects. the analyses show that an increase in the share of private primary schools is associated with a decrease inthe segregation of poverty in west german cities but not in east german ones. the association in west germany is particularly pronounced in local contexts characterised by growing rates of poor residents and growing proportions of young children. results imply that school choice avail ability may promote residential integration and at the same time reinforce school segregation.
keywords education, neighbourhoods, residential segregation, school choice, spatial inequality corresponding author  stefanie ja hnen, president s research group, wzb, reichpietschufer 50, berlin 10785, germany.
email stefanie.jaehnen wzb.eu received march 2021 accepted july 2022 introduction in the past two decades, socio economic residential sorting has increased substan tially in many cities across europe and the united states . the uneven distribu tion of households within urban space byincome, education or occupation is termed socio economic segregation. the place where a person lives particularly if it is adeprived area can be consequential for their individual outcomes such as educational attainment, career prospects andhealth, as research on neighbourhood effects has documented . it is children who are mostaffected, probably through effects of social learning.
still, few quantitative studies have set out to understand what drives changes in socioeconomic segregation over time .
1 owens found both that income segre gation in the largest us metropolitan areasis much higher among families with children and that it increased almost exclusively among this group she concluded that when accounting for rising income segregation, factors specific to families with children must be taken into account . one explanation for her findings isthat parents schooling considerations con tribute to their residential choices . the role of school options inshaping processes of residential sorting has only recently gained more scholarly attention, with a focus on the united states. these scholars argue thatexpanding school choice weakens the tradi tional link between housing and schooling decisions, especially for families with a higher socio economic status , therebyaffecting residential segregation patterns.
in this article, we investigate whether the availability of school choice accounts for cities segregation dynamics in the distinct national setting of germany. the countryhas a long history of residence based assign ment to public primary schools. unlike inthe united states, in germany the onlywidespread non neighbourhood choice options are private schools. since reunification, the share of students attending privateschools has constantly grown . as in other european countries,                     ja hnen and helbig 735the level of socio economic residential segregation in germany is considerably lowerthan in the united states, but it has also increased over the last decades . german children are much more segregated by income than the overall population .
but unlike in the united states, their uneven distribution has not grown more strongly than overall segregation in all cities.
against this backdrop, we adopt a longitudinal perspective and examine how the increasing availability of private primaryschools is related to changes in urban socioeconomic segregation over time. a uniquely compiled data set allows us to address thisresearch question for the first time in a european country. we combine various data sources in a new way to create a longi tudinal data set for the years 2005 to 2014, covering 74 large and medium sized german cities with over 3500 neighbourhoods.besides information on the share of private primary schools, we included further characteristics at the city level that reflect the localcontext. our outcome of interest represents one important dimension of income segregation the segregation of poverty. we use theterm to refer to the uneven distribution of poor and non poor households across neighbourhoods . in order to measure it, we calculate the index of segregation for the recipients of social assistance benefits. in germany,these benefits are granted to individuals in long term unemployment or with an income below the poverty threshold.methodologically, we go beyond crosssectional studies on the correlates of socioeconomic segregation by estimating linearpanel regression models with city fixedeffects.
we find a segregation reducing effect of private primary schools in west german cit ies, but not in east german ones. thisassociation is especially present in local contexts marked by growing rates of poor resi dents and growing proportions of youngchildren. our empirical results imply that, with increasing school choice, the socioeconomic divide might run less between resi dential districts but more between publicand private primary schools. hence, thepresent study highlights the interconnectionbetween school choice and patterns of spatial inequality.
primary school choice in germany for more than 100 years, primary schools in germany have had the task of teaching allchildren together for four to six years,depending on the federal state . subsequently, students transition to different secondary schools that qualify themfor various educational and occupationalcareers. as tracking takes place very early, agood primary education is often seen as key to attending the academic track  still the most common way to receive a university entrance qualification.
at first glance, there does not seem to be much of a choice for german parents allocation to public primary schools is organised via catchment areas, that is, studentsare assigned on the basis of their residence. this systemgenerates a tight link between place of residence and school location , so that schools reflect thesocial composition of their neighbourhood. anexception can be found in the most popu lous federal state of germany, north rhine westphalia starting in the school year 2008 2009, nrw abolishedcompulsory catchment areas for public pri mary schools .736 urban studies 60parents who want their children to attend  good schools can adopt three different choice strategies first, where rigid catchment systemsare in place, they can use residential mobility . oeltjen andwindzio investigated family movesand perceived neighbourhood quality in three german federal states and found that the lack of a desired primary school nearbygreatly increased the relocation rate. as a second educational strategy, parents can apply for their child to attend a differentschool, with approval being subject to various criteria, or they can illegally provide a false address in order to send their child totheir preferred public primary school. this strategy requires parents to make great efforts while, at the same time, facing great uncertainty. studies onthree large german cities suggest that about 10 of children attend a different public primary school than the one they wereassigned to . the third strategy parents may choose is to opt out of the regular public school sector. in germany, there are twochoice options one within the public, one within the private school sector.
the first choice option is public denominational schools, which are a peculiarity in nrw . like regular pub lic schools, they are completely publiclyfunded, but they are catholic or protestant.
because they make up a substantial share of primary schools, they allowed parents innrw a greater freedom of choice even before catchment areas were abolished. this is the reason why nrw has very few privateprimary schools compared to other federalstates .
in the other 15 federal states, private schools are the only school of choice for primary education. they are typically denominational schools, waldorf schools ormontessori schools. because private primary schools are exempted from the catchment system, they attract parents who are seeking to avoid their local school . despite the label private , these schools receive most of their funding from the state in addition, they often charge tuition fees . this is important, as the organisation of funding impacts . the affordability and thus accessibility of the educational system  . the german constitution stipulates that private schools can only be approved if they do not foster the segregation of students by parental resources. in reality, the level of fees is often unconstitutionally high, impeding access for lowincome families .
various studies have found that the composition of students attending private schools in germany is socially selective, especially at the primary level .
notwithstanding criticism, private schools have undergone expansion since the beginning of the 1990s as a proportion of all general schools, private schools rose from 4.5 in 1992 to 10.8 in 2015 . one factor was the catching up of east germany, where very few students attended a private school in 1992 . moreover, there has been a proliferation of private schools in urban areas in some larger cities, as many as 25 to 40 of all primary schools areprivate .
explanations for segregation an integrated theoretical framework residential segregation along socioeconomic lines is a multi factor phenomenon usually explained by the inter play between differentiated housing supply, households preferences and resources andja hnen and helbig 737the way housing is allocated to the population . in the following, we present an integrated conceptual model for investigating segregation andclarify how private schools, which are the focus of our analyses, fit in. the theoretical framework may also guide futureresearch on changing segregation patterns.we combine supply and demand oriented approaches with a contextual approach that stresses the importance of macro develop ments. as illustrated in figure 1, we distinguish between the supply and demand side of the housing market and between microand macro level.
on the demand side, private households are the main actors .
they decide on the place of residence based on their preferences and resources.preferences vary with life course stage, household composition, educational level, occupation, ethnicity and lifestyle. asowens notes, parents likely payspecial attention to the local structure of school options . but whether households areable to put their preferences into practice depends largely on their economic resources .
on the supply side of the housing market, a range of actors decide on the production and distribution of housing . suppliers establish specific entry barriers, thereby acting as gatekeepers. three basic allocation mechanisms can be differen tiated price, discrimination and administrative regulations.
when we only look at the micro level , patterns of spatial inequality seem to be the cumulative result of individual decisions . while established theories of residential sorting often describe an interplay between microand macro factors, they lack an explicit conceptualisation of the latter. van kempen and o zu ekren emphasised that economic, demographic and politicalmacro developments should be included when explaining segregation housing market players act within the context of the figure 1. explanations for residential segregation at the micro and macro level.
source authors illustration following musterd et al. and van kempen and o zu ekren . pictograms  getty images.738 urban studies 60countries, regions and cities they live in.
similarly, musterd et al. identified four universal structural factors and four local contextual factors that contribute tosocio economic segregation. contextual fac tors include economic, social, political and morphological layers. based on these two systematisations, we extend ourtheoretical framework by adding a macro level that includes the local context political, social, demographic, economic and morphological factors shape socio economic segregation by affecting the supply or demandside of the housing market. we acknowledgethat the national context is important, too.
but since we investigate only one national setting in this article, we leave this contextout for the sake of simplicity.
following owens , we argue that school policy and the resulting localschool options in the form of private schools is an important political factor that potentially affects the residential decisions of families with children. in addition to educationalpolicy, housing policy plays amajor role in shaping patterns of spatial inequality . regarding the local social context, socio economic segregation is linked tosocial inequality, in particular income inequality .
the demographic context refers to the number and composition of households andmigration. bischoff and reardon identified increases in income inequality and in the proportion of children as crucial correlates of growing income segregation at themetropolitan level. economic aspects include labour market changes and the supply structure in the three segments of urban housing markets, each serving a different demand rental housing, owner occupied housing andsocial housing . besides the quality of housing, its quantity and location determine the supply structure . last but not least, cities have to deal with morphological structures in the sense of a spatial heritage . empirically, the different contextual factors may partially overlap with one another, but the theoretical model is helpful for distinguishing various macro level factors in the study of residential segregation.
school choice and residential segregation in this study, we investigate how the expansion of private schools in urban contexts is associated with changes in socio economic residential segregation. past research suggests that households with children take schooling options into account when they make residential decisions . these considerations have probably gained weight because education has taken on greater significance for social mobility and reproduction . in germany, where students are tracked around age 10, concerns about good education are raised early on among higher ses parents.
research has only recently begun to investigate more thoroughly the link between school choice and residential sorting. moststudies focus on the united states, where parents have many school choice options, including magnet, charter and private schools . the central argument is that school choice expansion weakens the neighbourhood school link because it decouples residential and schooling decisions for specific families higher ses and white families are more likely to make use of such choice options because school related preferences and resources vary by ses andrace . these families are more willing and able to avoidja hnen and helbig 739neighbourhood public schools that they perceive as low quality based on their student composition .
for the united states, pearman and swain found that school choiceexpansion facilitates gentrification, defined as socioeconomic ascent of previously disinvested central city neighborhoods . this finding hasimplications for residential segregation, as gentrification can initially foster social integration and may only later increase socio spatial inequality . candipan distinguished neighbourhoods on four different trajectories ofsocio economic change or stability in orderto study the compositional mismatch between public schools and the neighbourhoods they serve. over time, the majority ofschools became less white than their surrounding neighbourhoods. this racial gap grew most strongly in neighbourhoodsundergoing socio economic ascent even more as the number of nearby schools of choice increased. in another study withindividual level data, candipan showed that opting out of assigned neighbourhood schools was more likely when there were other options nearby, especiallyin gentrifying neighbourhoods. in these kind of neighbourhoods, recent movers opted out more than long time residents. rich et al. investigated the impact of schoolchoice on racial sorting processes simultaneously for schools and neighbourhoods. they observed an increase in black white schoolsegregation and a decline in white black residential segregation in metropolitan school districts with growing charter enrol ment shares.
in germany, research on school choice and its consequences mostly relies on evi dence from nrw. scholars showed that school choice is dependent on both parental social status and the social and ethniccomposition of the local school if that school is socially disadvantaged or attended by a higher per centage of immigrants, the likelihood of opting out grows overall and with increasing social status. there are also differences byneighbourhood type, as found in the unitedstates in socially mixed inner city areas, higher ses parents are particularly likely to make use of free school choice .
so far, no study has looked at private schools in germany, the only primary schools that parents can choose in all other federal states, and how they might be relatedto residential segregation. for parents whowant to avoid their assigned neighbourhood school, going private is an alternative strategy to residential mobility. while intra urban moves to good school districts would increase residential segregation , the existenceof a private school market may decrease residential income segregation because housing decisions can bemade independently of schooling decisions.
we argue that when more private school options are available, higher ses familieswill be more likely to live in lower income neighbourhoods while at the same time avoiding their assigned local school . these families mighteither move into or remain in mixed neighbourhoods in order to benefit from lower rents. during our investigation period, rentsin major german cities have continuously increased, most substantially since 2010 . theconditions in the rental housing segment are of special relevance because germany has the second lowest homeownership rateamong oecd countries .rising rents have made moving into good  neighbourhoods, which is an alternative to choosing private schools, more expensive.740 urban studies 60private schools are an attractive option for higher ses parents who have specificpreferences regarding school social and eth nic composition these parents also have thenecessary resources to send their child to a private school .
resources are important because parentsneed to pay the school fees, which are com paratively low in international comparisonbut too high for low income families . moreover, parentshave to shoulder the travel costs attached to this decision.
in sum, we conceptualise the increasing availability of private primary schools ingermany as a local political context factorand hypothesise that it is related to adecrease in residential income segregation at the city level. specific constellations might make school choice options even more rele vant for residential sorting when more chil dren in a city are socio economicallydisadvantaged, as reflected in the studentbodies of neighbourhood schools, higher ses parents may be more likely to opt out.
prior research has found that income inequality and the proportion of childrenare correlates of changes in residential segre gation by income . we expect private school expan sion to be particularly important in socio demographic contexts characterised by bothincreasing income inequality and increasing proportions of young children.
data and method data we tested the formulated hypotheses using a uniquely combined longitudinal data set thatlinks multiple data sources for 74 large and medium sized german cities, covering the period from 2005 to 2014. data for 51 2cities came from the inner city spatial monitoringproject of the federal institute for research on building, urban affairs and spatial development .
3it relied on the municipal statistics of the irbcities and the federal employment agency statistics. for this project, uniformly defined items are collected on a yearly basis on thedistrict level. except for one, the irb cities we drew on are large cities with at least 100,000 inhabitants. in addition, we asked all cities that do not take part in theirb and currently have at least 100,000 inhabitants to deliver comparabledata.
4in the process, we gathered data on 235further cities. in total, our compiled data set contained 3509 districts ,which we used as a proxy for neighbour hoods. on average, 5475 individuals live in the spatial units of our city sample.
we merged these data with indicators from various other data sources that reflectcontextual change at the city level. first, we took information on the share of private primary schools from the municipal educationdatabase , data deliveries fromtwo state statistical offices and an online database on schools in east germany . second, we used the inkar database of the bbsr. third, the bbsr generously provided us with data onthe rental prices in the cities under investigation .
for each city, we measured the uneven distribution of recipients of social assistance benefits pursuant to book ii of the socialsecurity code as the outcome variable. as no official statistical data on income are avail able on a small scale level in germany,income segregation is typically studied as the segregation of poverty . the group ofja hnen and helbig 741benefit recipients is a good indicator for two reasons first, it captures both the long term unemployed and persons who earn so little that they additionally receive benefits. eitherway, their income is very low, which impairs their life chances. second, we measured low income not only for one person in a house hold but also for all other individuals in the household who received benefits pursuant to sgb ii . there are two limitations to keepin mind we could not include the segregation of poverty for older people, since benefits pursuant to sgb ii only apply to thepopulation below age 65. besides this, there is an unknown number of people that are eligible to receive benefits but do not applyfor them.
since the social security system underwent a huge reform in 2005, we analysed socio economic residential segregation from 2005 onwards. our analyses ended in 2014 for two reasons. first, the influx ofabout 890,000 refugees in 2015 might have affected both ethnic and socio economic segregation in germany. once asylum seekers are recognised, they also receive social assistance benefits if needed. second, asof 2016, there has been a slight change in thecomposition of the statistics of social assistance recipients by the federal employment agency . it is unclear whether thish a da ne f f e c to nt h em e a s ured level of socioeconomic segregation.
method methodologically, we go beyond previous cross sectional studies on the determinants of socio economic segregation. there are two major problems with cross sectionalanalyses of segregation levels  on the one hand, they tend to ignore the  intrinsic logic of cities . on theother, comparing cities with greatly differing inhabitant numbers per spatial unit can yieldvery different results according to the modifiable areal unit problem . that is why we estimated lin ear panel regression models with city fixedeffects to investigate how contextual changes at the city level wereassociated with changes in socio economicsegregation levels between 2005 and 2014.
these panel data models control for any unobserved time constant characteristics ofthe individual cities . because these models only com pare changes over time within cities, theyprobably provide more causal evidence thancross sectional models . all models include cluster robust standard errors toavoid understatement .
measures dependent variable. for each year from 2005 to 2014, we calculated the established index of segregation is for benefit recipients , which represents the evenness dimension of residential segre gation . it mea sures the uneven distribution of onepopulation group compared to the rest ofthe population across defined spatial units.
unlike other indices, the is has the advantage of being easy to calculate, to interpretand to compare with previous studies. theindex is computed as is  1 2xn i 1xi x c0ti c0xi t c0x c12 c12 c12 c12 c12 c12  where nrepresents the number of spatial units within the city, xiis the number of poor residents in unit i,xis the total number of poor residents in the city, tiis the number of residents in unit iand tis the742 urban studies 60total number of residents in the city. the resulting segregation value for the entire cityranges between 0 and 1. it can be interpretedas the percentage of the population group under study that would have to move to another spatial unit in order to reach aneven distribution across all units. in ourcase, these are the districts of each city.their size varies between and even withinthe cities, which limits the comparability ofis values between cities in a cross sectionalperspective. accounting for baseline differ ences between the cities, our fixed effectsmodels focused on changes in segregationlevels over time. thus, the maup should beof minor importance.
key independent variables. our key predictors measure local context factors at the city level. the availability of school choiceoptions was operationalised as the share of private primary schools in all primary schools. we expected increasing school choice to be of particular importance in socio demographic contexts marked bygrowing income inequality and growing pro portions of young children. to measuresocial inequality, we looked at the bottomand top of the social hierarchy the share ofpoor residents is captured by the rate of benefit recipients among all persons under age 65. as data on high income earners are notavailable, we used the share of university graduates from the inkar database as a proxy for high cultural capital, which isclosely linked to economic capital. the database also provides the share of children under age six in the total population of a city. to test whether private school expansion ismore strongly associated with residentialintegration in particular socio demographiccontexts, we included interaction termsbetween both private schools, benefit recipients and children andprivate schools, university graduates and children .control variables. we used the year in its metric form as a control variable. based onpast work, we also controlled for city levelcharacteristics that are associated with bothincome segregation and the key independentvariables logarithmised population size , district size and the level of initial and re letting rents . information on rents was provided by the bbsr and weighted byus against the county specific household income from the inkar database.
results descriptive findings before moving to the panel regression models, we present central descriptive statisticsin table 1. our outcome, the index of segre gation for benefit recipients, varies consider ably between the 74 cities, with a range from10 to 41 . still, it grew in the vast majorityof our city sample between 2005 and 2014.on average, to reach an even distributionacross the cities, 26 of all poor residentswould have had to move to another district.our key predictor, the share of private pri mary schools, also has a large variance from0 to a maximum of 40 , with 8.1 asthe mean. figure 2 additionally illustratesthe variation in the share of private primaryschools over time. on average, it grew bymore than 3 , with a larger increase at thetop of the distribution.
multivariate findings how are changes in school choice availabil ity and in the socio demographic contextassociated with changes in the segregation ofpoverty at the city level in order to answerthis question, table 2 reports estimates froma series of linear panel regression modelswith city fixed effects predicting socio ja hnen and helbig 743economic segregation. the models control for year, population size, district size and level of rents.
in models 1 and 2, we look at all 74 german cities of our compiled sample. in model 1, the coefficient for the year is positive and significant, meaning that socio economic segregation has increased over time.notably, there is no relation between citydistrict size and segregation so the maup seems to be less of a problem when looking at socio economicsegregation over time. our key predictor is the share of private primary schools.
contrary to our expectations, the respectivecoefficient indicates that greater availability of school choice is not associated with2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 14914192429343944 mean minimum maximum figure 2. variation in the share of private primary schools 2005 2014.table 1. variable description.
variable mean sd minimum maximum index of segregation 0.26 0.59 0.10 0.41 share of private primary schools 8.1 8.2 0 40 rate of benefit recipients 13.5 4.6 3.4 24.7 share of university graduates 15.1 6.1 5.5 36.2 share of children under age 6 5.2 0.4 4.0 6.4 y ear 2009.9 2.74 2005 2014population size 285,767.8 397,357.5 49,203 2,879,189 district size 5475.2 2915.8 1009.6 13,689.9 level of rents in eper m26.6 1.5 4.5 14.0 note without centring by mean and standard deviation.744 urban studies 60table 2. linear panel regression models with city fixed effects predicting socio economic segregation.
germany west germany only nrw west germany without nrw variable model 1 model 2 model 3 model 4 model 5 model 6 private primary schools 20.002 20.004 20.006 20.005 0.024 20.008  benefit recipients 0.002 0.006 0.017 0.018 0.015 0.021  university graduates 0.004 0.002 0.007 0.006 0.019 20.001  children 6 0.012 0.007 20.002 20.001 20.005 20.002  private schools 3benefit recipients20.000 0.004  private schools 3university graduates0.003 0.002  private schools 3children 6 0.004 20.003  private schools 3benefit recipients 3children 60.004 20.007  private schools 3university graduates 3children 60.002 20.003  y ear 0.010 0.012 0.009 0.010 0.001 0.016  constant 0.250 0.247 0.244 0.244 0.255 0.254  n 617 617 490 490 197 293 r2 0.450 0.510 0.374 0.389 0.505 0.361 note variables centred by mean and standard deviation. cluster robust standard errors are in parentheses. all models controlled for populati on size , district size and level of rents. berlin was counted among east germany.nrw north rhine westphalia. p 0.001. p 0.01. p 0.05.ja hnen and helbig 745changes in the segregation of poverty. out of the four predictors, only changes in the share of children under age six are statistically significantly and positively associatedwith changes in socio economic segregation,net of controls. in model 2, we introduce interaction terms between private primary schools and the socio demographic contextto test whether school choice availability isparticularly important in cities with increas ing income inequality and increasing proportions of young children. again, the coefficients are non significant.
in models 3 and 4, we look solely at cities in west germany because the expansion ofthe private school sector after reunificationfollowed quite different paths in east and west in west germany, the pace of expansion was more gradual, but in the east theprivate school sector started virtually fromzero and has grown remarkably . with respect to socioeconomic residential segregation, east german cities have experi enced a similar process of catching up theyshowed both higher levels of spatial inequality and steeper increases in spatial inequality than west german cities during our obser vation period . in model 3 on west germany, increases in the share of private primary schools are statistically significantly associ ated with a decrease in the segregation ofpoverty, as hypothesised. in east germany,there is no such relation .
consistent with prior research, socioeconomic segregation increases with growingrates of benefit recipients. moving to theinteraction terms in model 4, we also observe the predicted compound effect of political and socio demographic factors thecoefficient for the interaction between pri vate schools, benefit recipients and childrenis negative and significant, suggesting that the association between school choice availability and segregation is particularlypronounced in cities that have a growing rate of poor residents and an increasingshare of young children.
we further validated the results for west germany by splitting the cities in model 3by federal states model 5 is restricted to cit ies in nrw, where public denominationalschools have enabled school choice for along time and where catchment areas for pri mary education were abolished in 2008.here, the coefficient for private primary schools is negative but non significant.
model 6 includes all west german citieswith the exception of those in nrw. in thiscase, the respective coefficient shows thatthe greater availability of private primaryschools is only related to decreasing segrega tion in places where schooling is closelylinked to catchment areas.
concluding discussion the expansion of the private school sectorhas increased school choice availability forparents in germany, and especially for thosein urban settings over the last decades.these choice options loosen the traditionalneighbourhood school link, allowinghigher ses families to live in mixed neigh bourhoods while avoiding local publicschools. in this study, we considered theincreasing availability of private primaryschools as a local political context factor and examined whether it was associated with socio economic segregation dynamics in cit ies. to answer this question, we drew on auniquely compiled longitudinal data set thatincluded 74 german cities. results showedthat an increase in the share of private pri mary schools was related to a decrease inthe segregation of poverty in west germancities. this association was particularly pro nounced in socio demographic contextscharacterised by growing rates of poor resi dents and growing proportions of youngchildren. the much more dynamic746 urban studies 60development of both private school expansion and socio economic residential segregation after reunification may explain why we did not find the predicted effects in eastgerman cities.
though we investigated a distinct national context with a different educational landscape and lower segregation levels, our main finding isconsistent with previous work on the unitedstates where school choice options expand, residential segregation declines.
this has been found for different schooltypes and for socio economic and ethnic divisions while nechyba introduced a private school market in simulations of resi dential income segregation, rich et al. studied the effect of charter school expansion on sorting patterns by race. although charter schools are public, they share some fea tures with german private schools they do not make up a large share of schools but are especially present in cities. moreover, theyare expanding and non integrative . increasing charter school enrolment was linked to a notable increasein black white school segregation and arather small decrease in residential segregation which is not surprising, as residential sorting is a multi factor phenomenon.
our findings suggest that educational policy has consequences that go far beyond theeducational sphere school choice availabil ity likely promotes the residential integration of private school attendees, thereby lowering urban segregation. at the same time, it mayreinforce school segregation. this trade off between neighbourhood and school segregation is not a simple zero sum game, as richet al. demonstrated. we share their assessment that s mall gains in residential integration do not outweight the costs of schoolsegregation . privateschool attendance in germany is already socially selective, especially at the primary level . expanding school choice has the potential to foster the sorting of public and private primary schools along socio economic lines, thus exposing children to stratified learning contexts. for policymakers, one way to ameliorate the resulting problems is by allocating funds to schools according to the social and ethnic composition of the student body. more fundamentally, an integrated approach to housing and school policies is needed, given that neighbourhood and school sorting processes areclosely intertwined.
while this study highlights the role of schools in the formation of socio spatial inequality, it has some limitations that should guide further research. first, we rely on aggregate level data in our analyses, which bears the risk of an ecological fallacy.
because we use panel regression models with city fixed effects that only compare changes over time within cities, we more likely obtain causal estimates than cross sectional models.future work should corroborate our findings with evidence on individual motives and decisions regarding housing and schooling. second, we focus on the segregation of poverty as a central outcome because of data availability. us research found that some metropolitan level factors are relatedto changes in overall income segregation and the segregation of affluence, but not to changes in the segregation of poverty . thus, we would expect to find somewhat different results if data on the full income distribution were included. finally, it is worthwhile tolook more closely at the residential segregation of families with children when investigating the effects of increasing school choice.
acknowledgements this manuscript has greatly benefited from input by participants of the writing workshop at thewzb berlin social science center and from thediscussion at the ecsr conference 2019 inja hnen and helbig 747lausanne. we also thank the three anonymous reviewers for their helpful comments andsuggestions.
declaration of conflicting interests the authors declared no potential conflicts ofinterest with respect to the research, authorship,and or publication of this article.
funding stefanie ja hnen s research was funded by the german academic scholarship foundation.
orcid id stefanie ja hnen https orcid.org 0000 00027797 9099 notes 1. in a reanalysis with corrected estimates, reardon et al. showed that the centralresults of previous studies on income segrega tion hold, butthat the increase after 2000 was only half aslarge as previously calculated.
2. aachen, augsburg, berlin, bielefeld, bochum, bonn, bremen, chemnitz, cologne,darmstadt, dortmund, dresden, duisburg,du sseldorf, erfurt, essen, frankfurt a. m., freiburg, fu rth, halle , hamburg, hannover, heidelberg, ingolstadt, jena,karlsruhe, kassel, kiel, koblenz, konstanz,krefeld, leipzig, lu beck, ludwigshafen, magdeburg, mainz, mannheim, mu lheim a.
d. r., munich, nuremberg, oberhausen,offenbach, potsdam, regensburg, rostock,saarbru cken, stuttgart, weimar, wiesbaden, wuppertal and wu rzburg.
3. for the calculation of socio economic segregation in berlin, we drew on data delivered by the statistical office of berlin and brandenburg . until 2010, theberlin irb data were delivered for the 195statistical areas and only afterwards for the447 lor  that we use.4. flensburg and neubrandenburg are exceptions because they have slightly fewer than100,000 inhabitants.
5. bergisch gladbach, braunschweig, bremerhaven, cottbus, erlangen, flensburg,gelsenkirchen, gera, hagen, hamm,herne, leverkusen, mo nchengladbach, neubrandenburg, neuss, osnabru ck, paderborn, pforzheim, schwerin, siegen,trier, ulm and wolfsburg.
references